cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/benchmarking.adoc, before:


[[_benchmarking]]
== Benchmarking CometD

The CometD project comes with a load test tool that can be used to benchmark
how CometD scales.

The recommendation is to start from the out-of-the-box CometD benchmark.
If you want to write your own benchmark for your specific needs, start from
the CometD benchmark code, study it, and modify it for your needs, rather
than starting from scratch.

The CometD benchmark has been carefully adjusted and tuned over the years to
avoid common benchmark mistakes and to use the best tools available to produce
meaningful results.
Any improvement you may have for the CometD benchmark module is welcome:
benchmarking is continuously evolving, so the benchmark code can always be
improved.

[NOTE]
====
Like any benchmark, your mileage may vary, and while the benchmark may give
you good information about how CometD scales on your infrastructure, it may
well be that when deployed in production your application behaves differently
because the load from remote users, the network infrastructure, the TCP stack
settings, the OS settings, the JVM settings, the application settings, etc.
are different from what you benchmarked.
====

=== Benchmark Setup

Load testing can be very stressful to the OS, TCP stack and network, so you may
need to tune a few values to avoid that the OS, TCP stack or network become a
bottleneck, making you think the CometD does not scale. CometD does scale.
The setup must be done on both client(s) and server(s) hosts.

A suggested Linux configuration follows, and you should try to match it for
other operative systems if you don't use Linux.

The most important parameter to tune is the number of open files.
This is by default a small number like 1024, and must be increased, for example:

----
# ulimit -n 65536
----

You can make this setting persistent across reboots by modifying
`/etc/security/limits.conf`.

Another setting that you may want to tune, in particular in the client hosts,
is the range of ephemeral ports that the application can use.
If this range is too small, it will limit the number of CometD sessions that
the benchmark will be able to establish from a client host.
A typical range is `32768-61000` which gives about 28k ephemeral ports, but
you may need to increase it for very large benchmarks:

----
# sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_local_port_range="2000 64000"
----

As before, you can make this setting persistent across reboots by modifying
`/etc/security/limits.conf`.

Another important parameter that you may want to tune, in both the client
and the server hosts, is the maximum number of threads for the thread pools.
This parameter, called `max threads`, is by default 256 and may be too small
for benchmarks with a large number of clients.

The `max threads` parameter can be configured when you run the
<<_benchmarking_server,server>> and the <<_benchmarking_client,client>>.

Another important parameter that you want to tune, especially for benchmarks
with a large number of users, is the JVM max heap size.
This is by default 2 GiB for both the client JVM and server JVM, but must be
increased for larger benchmarks by modifying the JVM startup options present
in the `pom.xml` file in the benchmark client module directory
(`$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-client/pom.xml`)
and in the benchmark server module directory
(`$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-server/pom.xml`),
respectively for client and server.

A typical configuration for one client host and one server host (possibly the
same host) for a small number of users, say less than 5000, could be:

----
max open files -> 65536
local port range -> 32768-61000 (default; on client host only)
max threads -> 256 (default)
max heap size -> 2 GiB (default)
----

A typical configuration for larger number of users, say 10k or more, could be:

----
max open files -> 1048576
local port range -> 2000-64000 (on client host only)
max threads -> 2048
max heap size -> 8 GiB
----

The values above are just an example to make you aware of the fact that they
heavily impact the benchmark results. You have to try yourself and tune those
parameters depending on your benchmark goals, your operative system and your
hardware.

=== Running the Benchmark

The benchmark consists of a real chat application, and simulates remote users
sending messages to a chat room. The messages are broadcast to all room members.

The benchmark stresses one core feature of CometD, namely the capability of
receiving one message from a remote user and then fan-out this message to
all room members.

The benchmark client will measure the message latency for all room members,
that is, the time it takes for each room member to get the message sent by
original user.

The latencies are then displayed in ASCII-graphical form, along with other
interesting information about the benchmark run.

[[_benchmarking_server]]
==== Running the Server

The benchmark server is run from the
`$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-server/`
directory.

The `pom.xml` file in that directory can be modified to configure the `java`
executable to use, and the command line JVM parameters, in particular the
max heap size to use and the GC algorithm to use (and others you may want to
add).

Once you are satisfied with the JVM configuration specified in the `pom.xml`
file, you can run the benchmark server in a terminal window:

----
$ cd $COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-server/
$ mvn exec:exec
----

The benchmark prompts you for a number of configuration parameters such as the
TCP port to listen to, the max thread pool size, etc.

A typical output is:

----
listen port [8080]:
use ssl [false]:
selectors [8]:
max threads [256]:
2015-05-18 11:01:13,529 main [ INFO][util.log] Logging initialized @112655ms
transports (jsrws,jettyws,http,asynchttp) [jsrws,http]:
record statistics [true]:
record latencies [true]:
detect long requests [false]:
2015-05-18 11:01:17,521 main [ INFO][server.Server] jetty-9.2.10.v20150310
2015-05-18 11:01:17,868 main [ INFO][handler.ContextHandler] Started o.e.j.s.ServletContextHandler@37374a5e{/cometd,null,AVAILABLE}
2015-05-18 11:01:17,882 main [ INFO][server.ServerConnector] Started ServerConnector@5ebec15{HTTP/1.1}{0.0.0.0:8080}
2015-05-18 11:01:17,882 main [ INFO][server.Server] Started @117011ms
----

To exit the benchmark server, just hit `ctrl+c` on the terminal window.

[[_benchmarking_client]]
==== Running the Client

The benchmark client can be run on the same host as the benchmark server, but
it is recommended to run it on a different host, or on many different hosts,
than the server.

The benchmark client is run from the
$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-client/
directory.

The `pom.xml` file in that directory can be modified to configure the `java`
executable to use, and the command line JVM parameters, in particular the
max heap size to use and the GC algorithm to use (and others you may want to
add).

Once you are satisfied with the JVM configuration specified in the `pom.xml`
file, you can run the benchmark client in a terminal window:

----
$ cd $COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-client/
$ mvn exec:exec
----

The benchmark prompts you for a number of configuration parameters such as the
host to connect to, the TCP port to connect to, the max thread pool size, etc.

A typical output is:

----
server [localhost]:
port [8080]:
transports:
  0 - long-polling
  1 - jsr-websocket
  2 - jetty-websocket
transport [0]:
use ssl [false]:
max threads [256]:
context [/cometd]:
channel [/a]:
rooms [100]:
rooms per client [10]:
enable ack extension [false]:
2015-05-18 11:10:08,180 main [ INFO][util.log] Logging initialized @6095ms

clients [1000]:
Waiting for clients to be ready...
Waiting for clients 998/1000
Clients ready: 1000
batch count [1000]:
batch size [10]:
batch pause (µs) [10000]:
message size [50]:
randomize sends [false]:
----

The default configuration creates 100 chat rooms, and each user is a member
of 10, randomly chosen, rooms.

The default configuration connects 1000 users to the server at `localhost:8080`
and sends 1000 batches of 10 messages each, each message of 50 bytes size.

When the benchmark run is complete, the message latency graph is displayed:

----
Outgoing: Elapsed = 10872 ms | Rate = 919 messages/s - 91 requests/s - ~0.351 Mib/s
Waiting for messages to arrive 998612/1000280
All messages arrived 1000280/1000280
Messages - Success/Expected = 1000280/1000280
Incoming - Elapsed = 10889 ms | Rate = 91853 messages/s - 36083 responses/s(39.28%) - ~35.039 Mib/s
    @                 _  4,428 µs (27125, 2.71%)
          @           _  8,856 µs (76147, 7.61%)
              @       _  13,284 µs (108330, 10.83%)
                 @    _  17,713 µs (134328, 13.43%)
                   @  _  22,141 µs (150450, 15.04%)
                   @  _  26,569 µs (154943, 15.49%) ^50%
                 @    _  30,998 µs (134868, 13.48%)
            @         _  35,426 µs (91634, 9.16%) ^85%
       @              _  39,854 µs (55773, 5.58%)
    @                 _  44,283 µs (31270, 3.13%) ^95%
  @                   _  48,711 µs (18015, 1.80%)
 @                    _  53,139 µs (9208, 0.92%) ^99%
 @                    _  57,568 µs (4216, 0.42%)
@                     _  61,996 µs (2162, 0.22%)
@                     _  66,424 µs (912, 0.09%) ^99.9%
@                     _  70,853 µs (502, 0.05%)
@                     _  75,281 µs (178, 0.02%)
@                     _  79,709 µs (164, 0.02%)
@                     _  84,137 µs (46, 0.00%)
@                     _  88,566 µs (7, 0.00%)
@                     _  92,994 µs (2, 0.00%)
Messages - Latency: 1000280 samples | min/avg/50th%/99th%/max = 300/22,753/22,265/51,937/88,866 µs
Messages - Network Latency Min/Ave/Max = 0/22/88 ms
Slowest Message ID = 30111/bench/a time = 88 ms
Thread Pool - Tasks = 391244 | Concurrent Threads max = 255 | Queue Size max = 940 | Queue Latency avg/max = 3/17 ms | Task Latency avg/max = 0/28 ms
----

In the example above, the benchmark client sent messages to the server at
a nominal rate of 1 batch every 10 ms (therefore at a nominal rate of 1000
messages/s), but the real outgoing rate was of 919 messages/s, as reported
in the first line.

Because there were 100 rooms, and each user was subscribed to 10 rooms, there
were 100 members per room in average, and therefore each message was broadcast
to about 100 other users.
This yielded an incoming nominal message rate of 100,000 messages/s, but the
real incoming rate was 91853 messages/s (on par with the outgoing rate),
with a median latency of 22 ms and a max latency of 88 ms.

The ASCII graph represent the message latency distribution.
Imagine to rotate the latency distribution graph 90 degrees counter-clockwise.
Then you will see a bell-shaped curve (strongly shifted to the left) with the peak
at around 24 ms and a long tail towards 100 ms.

For each interval of time, the curve reports the number of messages received and
their percentage over the total (in parenthesis) and where various percentiles fall.

To exit gracefully the benchmark client, just type `0` for the number of users.

==== Running Multiple Clients

If you want to run the CometD benchmark using multiple client hosts, you will need
to adjust few parameters on each benchmark client.

Recall that the benchmark simulates a chat application, and that the message
latency times are recorded on the same client host.

Because the benchmark client waits for all messages to arrive in order to measure
their latency, it is necessary that each user receiving the message is on the
same host as the user sending the message.

Each benchmark client defines a number of rooms (by default 100) and a root
channel to which messages are sent (by default `/a`).
Messages to the first room, `room0`, go to channel `/a/0` and so forth.

When you are using multiple benchmark client hosts, you must specify different
root channels for each benchmark client host.
Therefore, on client host `A` you specify root channel `/a`; on client host
`B` you specify root channel `/b` and so forth.
This is to avoid that benchmark client host `A` waits for messages that will
not arrive because they are being delivered to client host `B`.

Also, it would be very difficult to correlate a timestamp generated in one
client host JVM (via `System.nanoTime()`) with a timestamp generated in another
client host JVM.

The recommended configuration is therefore to specify a different root channel
for each benchmark client, so that users from each client host will send and
receive messages only from users existing in the same client host.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/benchmarking.adoc, after:


[[_benchmarking]]
== Benchmarking CometD

The CometD project comes with a load test tool that can be used to benchmark
how CometD scales.

The recommendation is to start from the out-of-the-box CometD benchmark.
If you want to write your own benchmark for your specific needs, start from
the CometD benchmark code, study it, and modify it for your needs, rather
than starting from scratch.

The CometD benchmark has been carefully adjusted and tuned over the years to
avoid common benchmark mistakes and to use the best tools available to produce
meaningful results.
Any improvement you may have for the CometD benchmark module is welcome:
benchmarking is continuously evolving, so the benchmark code can always be
improved.

[NOTE]
====
Like any benchmark, your mileage may vary, and while the benchmark may give
you good information about how CometD scales on your infrastructure, it may
well be that when deployed in production your application behaves differently
because the load from remote users, the network infrastructure, the TCP stack
settings, the OS settings, the JVM settings, the application settings, etc.
are different from what you benchmarked.
====

=== Benchmark Setup

Load testing can be very stressful to the OS, TCP stack and network, so you may
need to tune a few values to avoid that the OS, TCP stack or network become a
bottleneck, making you think the CometD does not scale. CometD does scale.
The setup must be done on both client(s) and server(s) hosts.

A suggested Linux configuration follows, and you should try to match it for
other operative systems if you don't use Linux.

The most important parameter to tune is the number of open files.
This is by default a small number like 1024, and must be increased, for example:

----
# ulimit -n 65536
----

You can make this setting persistent across reboots by modifying
`/etc/security/limits.conf`.

Another setting that you may want to tune, in particular in the client hosts,
is the range of ephemeral ports that the application can use.
If this range is too small, it will limit the number of CometD sessions that
the benchmark will be able to establish from a client host.
A typical range is `32768-61000` which gives about 28k ephemeral ports, but
you may need to increase it for very large benchmarks:

----
# sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_local_port_range="2000 64000"
----

As before, you can make this setting persistent across reboots by modifying
`/etc/security/limits.conf`.

Another important parameter that you may want to tune, in both the client
and the server hosts, is the maximum number of threads for the thread pools.
This parameter, called `max threads`, is by default 256 and may be too small
for benchmarks with a large number of clients.

The `max threads` parameter can be configured when you run the
xref:_benchmarking_server,server>> and the <<_benchmarking_client[client].

Another important parameter that you want to tune, especially for benchmarks
with a large number of users, is the JVM max heap size.
This is by default 2 GiB for both the client JVM and server JVM, but must be
increased for larger benchmarks by modifying the JVM startup options present
in the `pom.xml` file in the benchmark client module directory
(`$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-client/pom.xml`)
and in the benchmark server module directory
(`$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-server/pom.xml`),
respectively for client and server.

A typical configuration for one client host and one server host (possibly the
same host) for a small number of users, say less than 5000, could be:

----
max open files -> 65536
local port range -> 32768-61000 (default; on client host only)
max threads -> 256 (default)
max heap size -> 2 GiB (default)
----

A typical configuration for larger number of users, say 10k or more, could be:

----
max open files -> 1048576
local port range -> 2000-64000 (on client host only)
max threads -> 2048
max heap size -> 8 GiB
----

The values above are just an example to make you aware of the fact that they
heavily impact the benchmark results. You have to try yourself and tune those
parameters depending on your benchmark goals, your operative system and your
hardware.

=== Running the Benchmark

The benchmark consists of a real chat application, and simulates remote users
sending messages to a chat room. The messages are broadcast to all room members.

The benchmark stresses one core feature of CometD, namely the capability of
receiving one message from a remote user and then fan-out this message to
all room members.

The benchmark client will measure the message latency for all room members,
that is, the time it takes for each room member to get the message sent by
original user.

The latencies are then displayed in ASCII-graphical form, along with other
interesting information about the benchmark run.

[[_benchmarking_server]]
==== Running the Server

The benchmark server is run from the
`$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-server/`
directory.

The `pom.xml` file in that directory can be modified to configure the `java`
executable to use, and the command line JVM parameters, in particular the
max heap size to use and the GC algorithm to use (and others you may want to
add).

Once you are satisfied with the JVM configuration specified in the `pom.xml`
file, you can run the benchmark server in a terminal window:

----
$ cd $COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-server/
$ mvn exec:exec
----

The benchmark prompts you for a number of configuration parameters such as the
TCP port to listen to, the max thread pool size, etc.

A typical output is:

----
listen port [8080]:
use ssl [false]:
selectors [8]:
max threads [256]:
2015-05-18 11:01:13,529 main [ INFO][util.log] Logging initialized @112655ms
transports (jsrws,jettyws,http,asynchttp) [jsrws,http]:
record statistics [true]:
record latencies [true]:
detect long requests [false]:
2015-05-18 11:01:17,521 main [ INFO][server.Server] jetty-9.2.10.v20150310
2015-05-18 11:01:17,868 main [ INFO][handler.ContextHandler] Started o.e.j.s.ServletContextHandler@37374a5e{/cometd,null,AVAILABLE}
2015-05-18 11:01:17,882 main [ INFO][server.ServerConnector] Started ServerConnector@5ebec15{HTTP/1.1}{0.0.0.0:8080}
2015-05-18 11:01:17,882 main [ INFO][server.Server] Started @117011ms
----

To exit the benchmark server, just hit `ctrl+c` on the terminal window.

[[_benchmarking_client]]
==== Running the Client

The benchmark client can be run on the same host as the benchmark server, but
it is recommended to run it on a different host, or on many different hosts,
than the server.

The benchmark client is run from the
$COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-client/
directory.

The `pom.xml` file in that directory can be modified to configure the `java`
executable to use, and the command line JVM parameters, in particular the
max heap size to use and the GC algorithm to use (and others you may want to
add).

Once you are satisfied with the JVM configuration specified in the `pom.xml`
file, you can run the benchmark client in a terminal window:

----
$ cd $COMETD/cometd-java/cometd-java-benchmark/cometd-java-benchmark-client/
$ mvn exec:exec
----

The benchmark prompts you for a number of configuration parameters such as the
host to connect to, the TCP port to connect to, the max thread pool size, etc.

A typical output is:

----
server [localhost]:
port [8080]:
transports:
  0 - long-polling
  1 - jsr-websocket
  2 - jetty-websocket
transport [0]:
use ssl [false]:
max threads [256]:
context [/cometd]:
channel [/a]:
rooms [100]:
rooms per client [10]:
enable ack extension [false]:
2015-05-18 11:10:08,180 main [ INFO][util.log] Logging initialized @6095ms

clients [1000]:
Waiting for clients to be ready...
Waiting for clients 998/1000
Clients ready: 1000
batch count [1000]:
batch size [10]:
batch pause (µs) [10000]:
message size [50]:
randomize sends [false]:
----

The default configuration creates 100 chat rooms, and each user is a member
of 10, randomly chosen, rooms.

The default configuration connects 1000 users to the server at `localhost:8080`
and sends 1000 batches of 10 messages each, each message of 50 bytes size.

When the benchmark run is complete, the message latency graph is displayed:

----
Outgoing: Elapsed = 10872 ms | Rate = 919 messages/s - 91 requests/s - ~0.351 Mib/s
Waiting for messages to arrive 998612/1000280
All messages arrived 1000280/1000280
Messages - Success/Expected = 1000280/1000280
Incoming - Elapsed = 10889 ms | Rate = 91853 messages/s - 36083 responses/s(39.28%) - ~35.039 Mib/s
    @                 _  4,428 µs (27125, 2.71%)
          @           _  8,856 µs (76147, 7.61%)
              @       _  13,284 µs (108330, 10.83%)
                 @    _  17,713 µs (134328, 13.43%)
                   @  _  22,141 µs (150450, 15.04%)
                   @  _  26,569 µs (154943, 15.49%) ^50%
                 @    _  30,998 µs (134868, 13.48%)
            @         _  35,426 µs (91634, 9.16%) ^85%
       @              _  39,854 µs (55773, 5.58%)
    @                 _  44,283 µs (31270, 3.13%) ^95%
  @                   _  48,711 µs (18015, 1.80%)
 @                    _  53,139 µs (9208, 0.92%) ^99%
 @                    _  57,568 µs (4216, 0.42%)
@                     _  61,996 µs (2162, 0.22%)
@                     _  66,424 µs (912, 0.09%) ^99.9%
@                     _  70,853 µs (502, 0.05%)
@                     _  75,281 µs (178, 0.02%)
@                     _  79,709 µs (164, 0.02%)
@                     _  84,137 µs (46, 0.00%)
@                     _  88,566 µs (7, 0.00%)
@                     _  92,994 µs (2, 0.00%)
Messages - Latency: 1000280 samples | min/avg/50th%/99th%/max = 300/22,753/22,265/51,937/88,866 µs
Messages - Network Latency Min/Ave/Max = 0/22/88 ms
Slowest Message ID = 30111/bench/a time = 88 ms
Thread Pool - Tasks = 391244 | Concurrent Threads max = 255 | Queue Size max = 940 | Queue Latency avg/max = 3/17 ms | Task Latency avg/max = 0/28 ms
----

In the example above, the benchmark client sent messages to the server at
a nominal rate of 1 batch every 10 ms (therefore at a nominal rate of 1000
messages/s), but the real outgoing rate was of 919 messages/s, as reported
in the first line.

Because there were 100 rooms, and each user was subscribed to 10 rooms, there
were 100 members per room in average, and therefore each message was broadcast
to about 100 other users.
This yielded an incoming nominal message rate of 100,000 messages/s, but the
real incoming rate was 91853 messages/s (on par with the outgoing rate),
with a median latency of 22 ms and a max latency of 88 ms.

The ASCII graph represent the message latency distribution.
Imagine to rotate the latency distribution graph 90 degrees counter-clockwise.
Then you will see a bell-shaped curve (strongly shifted to the left) with the peak
at around 24 ms and a long tail towards 100 ms.

For each interval of time, the curve reports the number of messages received and
their percentage over the total (in parenthesis) and where various percentiles fall.

To exit gracefully the benchmark client, just type `0` for the number of users.

==== Running Multiple Clients

If you want to run the CometD benchmark using multiple client hosts, you will need
to adjust few parameters on each benchmark client.

Recall that the benchmark simulates a chat application, and that the message
latency times are recorded on the same client host.

Because the benchmark client waits for all messages to arrive in order to measure
their latency, it is necessary that each user receiving the message is on the
same host as the user sending the message.

Each benchmark client defines a number of rooms (by default 100) and a root
channel to which messages are sent (by default `/a`).
Messages to the first room, `room0`, go to channel `/a/0` and so forth.

When you are using multiple benchmark client hosts, you must specify different
root channels for each benchmark client host.
Therefore, on client host `A` you specify root channel `/a`; on client host
`B` you specify root channel `/b` and so forth.
This is to avoid that benchmark client host `A` waits for messages that will
not arrive because they are being delivered to client host `B`.

Also, it would be very difficult to correlate a timestamp generated in one
client host JVM (via `System.nanoTime()`) with a timestamp generated in another
client host JVM.

The recommended configuration is therefore to specify a different root channel
for each benchmark client, so that users from each client host will send and
receive messages only from users existing in the same client host.
