cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/contribute.adoc, before:


[[_contribute]]
== Contributing to CometD

You can contribute to the CometD projects in several ways.
The CometD project values your contribution, of _any_ kind, and participating
in mailing lists, submitting bugs or documentation enhancements is equally
important as contributing code.

[[_contribute_mailing_lists]]
=== Contributing via Mailing Lists

The simplest way to contribute to the CometD project is to subscribe to the
CometD mailing lists. There are two mailing lists:

* *cometd-users@googlegroups.com*, to be used for discussions about how to use CometD.
  This is a low traffic mailing list.
  To subscribe to this list, go to the http://groups.google.com/group/cometd-users/[mailing list home page]
  and follow the instructions to apply for membership.
* *cometd-dev@googlegroups.com*, to be used for discussions about the CometD implementation.
  This is a low traffic mailing list.
  To subscribe to this list, go to the http://groups.google.com/group/cometd-dev/[mailing list home page]
  and follow the instructions to apply for membership.
  New members can join immediately the mailing list and receive messages,
  but their first post will be subject to moderation.

If you post for the first time, please allow some hour to moderators to review
the message and approve your post.
This is done to reduce spam to the minimum possible.

[[_contribute_issue_reporting]]
=== Contributing by Reporting Issues

The CometD project uses https://github.com/cometd/cometd/issues[GitHub Issues] to track
issues about the CometD project, from bugs to feature requests, to documentation tasks, etc.
Virtually every activity is tracked in this issue tracker.

The address https://bugs.cometd.org is an alias for the CometD GitHub Issue Tracker.

In order to submit an issue, you must have a valid GitHub login.
If you do not have a GitHub login already, you can create one by
visiting https://github.com/join[this link].

[[_contribute_code]]
=== Contributing Code Fixes, Enhancements and Documentation

The CometD project code is hosted at https://github.com/cometd[GitHub CometD Organization].
The repository for the CometD libraries is https://github.com/cometd/cometd.
You can build the CometD project yourself by following the instruction in
<<_build,the build section>>.

In order to contribute code or documentation, you need to certify the
http://developercertificate.org/[Developer Certificate of Origin] and sign-off your
`git` commits using `git commit --signoff`.

By signing off your `git` commits, you agree that you can certify
what stated by the Developer Certificate of Origin.
That is enough for the CometD project to accept your contribution.

The Developer Certificate of Origin (from https://developercertificate.org/):

====
[source,text]
----
include::{resources}/developercertificate.txt[lines=14..50]
----
====

To contribute code or documentation, follow these steps:

* Create an issue at http://bugs.cometd.org.
* Commit your changes:
** If you have multiple commits, squash them into one commit only.
** Make sure that the email in the `Author` field of the commits
corresponds to your GitHub email.
** Signoff your commit using `git commit --signoff`.
** The commit message should reference the issue number with the
format `#<issue_number>`, so that GitHub can properly link the
commit with the issue.
* Issue a https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests[GitHub pull request].

For example:
----
commit  0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567
Author: John Doe <john.doe@nowhere.com>
Date:   Sun Jan 01 00:00:00 1970 +0000

    Issue #XYZ - <issue title>

    <description of the changes>

    Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@nowhere.com>
----

Commit message:

Clarified requirements for contribution.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/contribute.adoc, after:


[[_contribute]]
== Contributing to CometD

You can contribute to the CometD projects in several ways.
The CometD project values your contribution, of _any_ kind, and participating
in mailing lists, submitting bugs or documentation enhancements is equally
important as contributing code.

[[_contribute_mailing_lists]]
=== Contributing via Mailing Lists

The simplest way to contribute to the CometD project is to subscribe to the
CometD mailing lists. There are two mailing lists:

* *cometd-users@googlegroups.com*, to be used for discussions about how to use CometD.
  This is a low traffic mailing list.
  To subscribe to this list, go to the http://groups.google.com/group/cometd-users/[mailing list home page]
  and follow the instructions to apply for membership.
* *cometd-dev@googlegroups.com*, to be used for discussions about the CometD implementation.
  This is a low traffic mailing list.
  To subscribe to this list, go to the http://groups.google.com/group/cometd-dev/[mailing list home page]
  and follow the instructions to apply for membership.
  New members can join immediately the mailing list and receive messages,
  but their first post will be subject to moderation.

If you post for the first time, please allow some hour to moderators to review
the message and approve your post.
This is done to reduce spam to the minimum possible.

[[_contribute_issue_reporting]]
=== Contributing by Reporting Issues

The CometD project uses https://github.com/cometd/cometd/issues[GitHub Issues] to track
issues about the CometD project, from bugs to feature requests, to documentation tasks, etc.
Virtually every activity is tracked in this issue tracker.

The address https://bugs.cometd.org is an alias for the CometD GitHub Issue Tracker.

In order to submit an issue, you must have a valid GitHub login.
If you do not have a GitHub login already, you can create one by
visiting https://github.com/join[this link].

[[_contribute_code]]
=== Contributing Code Fixes, Enhancements and Documentation

The CometD project code is hosted at https://github.com/cometd[GitHub CometD Organization].
The repository for the CometD libraries is https://github.com/cometd/cometd.
You can build the CometD project yourself by following the instruction in
<<_build,the build section>>.

In order to contribute code or documentation, you need to comply with the following two
requirements:

* You must certify the http://developercertificate.org/[Developer Certificate of Origin]
and sign-off your `git` commits using `git commit --signoff`.
By signing off your `git` commits, you agree that you can certify
what stated by the Developer Certificate of Origin.
* You must license your contributed code under the
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[CometD project license], i.e. the Apache
License version 2.0.

Complying with these two requirements is enough for the CometD project to accept your
contribution.

The Developer Certificate of Origin (from https://developercertificate.org/):

====
[source,text]
----
include::{resources}/developercertificate.txt[lines=14..50]
----
====

To contribute code or documentation, follow these steps:

* Create an issue at http://bugs.cometd.org.
* Commit your changes:
** If you have multiple commits, consider squashing them into one commit only.
** Make sure that the email in the `Author` field of the commits
corresponds to your GitHub email.
** Signoff your commits using `git commit --signoff`.
** The commit message should reference the issue number with the
format `#<issue_number>`, so that GitHub can properly link the
commit with the issue.
* Issue a https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests[GitHub pull request].

For example:
----
commit  0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567
Author: John Doe <john.doe@nowhere.com>
Date:   Sun Jan 01 00:00:00 1970 +0000

    Issue #XYZ - <issue title>

    <description of the changes>

    Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@nowhere.com>
----

If your contribution contains new Java or JavaScript files, they must have the
copyright/license header that is present in other Java or JavaScript files
(otherwise the build will fail).
