cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/extensions_acknowledge.adoc, before:


[[_extensions_acknowledge]]
=== Message Acknowledgment Extension

By default, CometD does not enforce a strict order on server-to-client message
delivery, nor it provides the guarantee that messages sent by the server are
received by the clients.

The _message acknowledgment_ extension provides message ordering and message
reliability to the Bayeux protocol for messages sent from server to client.
This extension requires both a client-side extension and a server-side extension.
The server-side extension is available in Java.
If you are interested only in message ordering (and not reliability), see also
<<_extensions_acknowledge_ordering,the ordering section>>.

==== Enabling the Server-side Message Acknowledgment Extension

To enable support for acknowledged messages, you must add the extension to the
`org.cometd.bayeux.server.BayeuxServer` instance during initialization:

====
[source,java]
----
bayeuxServer.addExtension(new org.cometd.server.ext.AcknowledgedMessagesExtension());
----
====

The `AcknowledgedMessageExtension` is a per-server extension that monitors
handshakes from new remote clients, looking for those that also support the
acknowledged message extension, and then adds the `AcknowledgedMessagesClientExtension`
to the `ServerSession` correspondent to the remote client, during the handshake processing.

Once added to a `ServerSession`, the `AcknowledgedMessagesClientExtension`
guarantees ordered delivery of messages, and resend of unacknowledged
messages, from server to client.
The extension also maintains a list of unacknowledged messages and
intercepts the traffic on the `/meta/connect` channel to insert and check
acknowledge IDs.

==== Enabling the Client-side Message Acknowledgment Extension

The `dojox/cometd/ack.js` provides the client-side extension binding for Dojo,
and it is sufficient to use Dojo's `require()` mechanism:

====
[source,javascript]
----
require(["dojox/cometd", "dojox/cometd/ack"], function(cometd) {
    ...
});
----
====

The example above is valid also when using the `require()` syntax with jQuery.

The file `jquery.cometd-ack.js` provides the client-side extension binding for jQuery.
When you are not using the `require()` syntax, you must include the
implementation file and the jQuery extension binding
in the HTML page via the `<script>` tag:

====
[source,javascript]
----
<script type="text/javascript" src="AckExtension.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="jquery.cometd-ack.js"></script>
----
====

In both Dojo and jQuery extension bindings, the extension is registered on
the default `cometd` object under the name "ack".

Furthermore, you can programmatically disable/enable the extension before
initialization by setting the `ackEnabled` boolean field on the `cometd` object:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Disables the ack extension during handshake
cometd.ackEnabled = false;
cometd.init(cometdURL);
----
====

[[_extensions_acknowledge_details]]
==== Acknowledge Extension Details

To enable message acknowledgement, both client and server must indicate that
they support message acknowledgement.
This is negotiated during handshake.
On handshake, the client sends `{"ext":{"ack": "true"}}` to indicate that it
supports message acknowledgement.
If the server also supports message acknowledgement, it likewise replies with
`{"ext":{"ack": "true"}}`.

The extension does not insert ack IDs in every message, as this would impose
a significant burden on the server for messages sent to multiple clients
(which would need to be reserialized to JSON for each client). Instead the
ack ID is inserted in the `ext` field of the `/meta/connect` messages that
are associated with message delivery.
Each `/meta/connect` request contains the ack ID of the last received ack
response: `"ext":{"ack": 42}`.
Similarly, each `/meta/connect` response contains an ext ack ID that uniquely
identifies the batch of responses sent.

If a `/meta/connect` message is received with an ack ID lower that any
unacknowledged messages held by the extension, then these messages are
requeued prior to any more recently queued messages and the `/meta/connect`
response sent with a new ack ID.

It is important to note that message acknowledgement is guaranteed from
server to client only, and not from client to server.
This means that the ack extension guarantees that messages sent by the
server to the clients will be resent in case of temporary network failures
that produce loss of messages.
It does not guarantee however, that messages sent by the client will reach
the server.

[[_extensions_acknowledge_ordering]]
==== Message Ordering

Message ordering is not enforced by default by CometD.
A CometD server has two ways to deliver the messages present in the
`ServerSession` queue to its correspondent remote client:

* through `/meta/connect` responses
* through direct responses

Delivery through a `/meta/connect` response means that the server will
deliver the messages present in the `ServerSession` queue along with a
`/meta/connect` response, so that the messages delivered to the remote
client are: `[{/meta/connect response message}, {queued message 1}, {queued message 2}, ...]`.

Direct delivery depends on the transport.

For polling transports it means that the server will deliver the messages
present in the `ServerSession` queue along with some other response message
that is being processed in that moment.
For example, let's assume that `clientA` is already subscribed to channel
`/foo`, and that it wants to subscribe also to channel `/bar`.
Then `clientA` sends a subscription request for channel `/bar` to the server,
and just before processing the subscription request for channel`/bar`, the
server receives a message on channel `/foo`, that therefore needs to be
delivered to `clientA` (for example, `clientB` published a message to channel
`/foo`, or an external system produced a message on channel `/foo`). The message
on channel `/foo` gets queued on `clientA`'s `ServerSession`.
However, the server notices that it has to reply to subscription request for
`/bar`, so it includes the message on channel `/foo` in that response, thus
avoiding to wake up the `/meta/connect`, so that the messages delivered to the
remote client are: `[{subscription response message for /bar}, {queued message on /foo}]`.

For non-polling transports such as `websocket` the server will just deliver
the messages present in the `ServerSession` queue without waking up the
`/meta/connect`, because non-polling transports have a way to send
server-to-client messages without the need to have a pending response onto
which the `ServerSession`'s queued messages are piggybacked.

These two ways of delivering messages compete each other to deliver messages
with the smallest latency.
Therefore it is possible that a server receives from an external system two
messages to be delivered for the same client, say `message1` first and then
`message2`; `message1` is queued and immediately dequeued by a direct delivery,
while `message2` is queued and then dequeued by a `/meta/connect` delivery.
The client may see `message2` arriving before `message1`, for example because
the thread scheduling on the server favored `message2`'s processing or because
the TCP communication for `message1` was somehow slowed down (not to mention
that browsers could as well be source of uncertainty).

To enable just server-to-client message ordering (but not reliability), you
need to configure the server with the `metaConnectDeliverOnly` parameter, as
explained in <<_java_server_configuration,the java server configuration section>>.

When server-to-client message ordering is enabled, all messages will be
delivered through `meta/connect` responses.
In the example above, `message1` will be delivered to the client, and
`message2` will wait on the server until another `meta/connect` is issued by
the client (which happens immediately after `message1` has been received by
the client). When the server receives the second `meta/connect` request, it
will respond to it immediately and deliver `message2` to the client.

It is clear that server-to-client message ordering comes at the small price
of slightly increased latencies (`message2` has to wait the next `meta/connect`
before being delivered), and slightly more activity for the server (since
`meta/connect` will be resumed more frequently than normal).

==== Demo

There is an example of acknowledged messages in the Dojo chat demo that comes
bundled with the CometD distribution, and instruction on how to run the CometD
demos in <<_installation_demos,the installation demos section>>.

To run the acknowledgement demo, follow these steps:

. Start CometD
+
====
[source]
----
$ cd cometd-demo
$ mvn jetty:run
----
====
. Point your browser to http://localhost:8080/dojo-examples/chat/ and make
  sure to check _Enable reliable messaging_
. Use two different browser instances to begin a chat session, then briefly
  disconnect one browser from the network
. While one browser is disconnected, type some chat in the other browser,
  which is received when the disconnected browser reconnects to the network.

Notice that if the disconnected browser is disconnected in excess of `maxInterval`
(default 10s), the client times out and the unacknowledged queue is discarded.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/extensions_acknowledge.adoc, after:


[[_extensions_acknowledge]]
=== Message Acknowledgment Extension

By default, CometD does not enforce a strict order on server-to-client message
delivery, nor it provides the guarantee that messages sent by the server are
received by the clients.

The _message acknowledgment_ extension provides message ordering and message
reliability to the Bayeux protocol for messages sent from server to client.
This extension requires both a client-side extension and a server-side extension.
The server-side extension is available in Java.
If you are interested only in message ordering (and not reliability), see also
xref:_extensions_acknowledge_ordering[the ordering section].

==== Enabling the Server-side Message Acknowledgment Extension

To enable support for acknowledged messages, you must add the extension to the
`org.cometd.bayeux.server.BayeuxServer` instance during initialization:

====
[source,java]
----
bayeuxServer.addExtension(new org.cometd.server.ext.AcknowledgedMessagesExtension());
----
====

The `AcknowledgedMessageExtension` is a per-server extension that monitors
handshakes from new remote clients, looking for those that also support the
acknowledged message extension, and then adds the `AcknowledgedMessagesClientExtension`
to the `ServerSession` correspondent to the remote client, during the handshake processing.

Once added to a `ServerSession`, the `AcknowledgedMessagesClientExtension`
guarantees ordered delivery of messages, and resend of unacknowledged
messages, from server to client.
The extension also maintains a list of unacknowledged messages and
intercepts the traffic on the `/meta/connect` channel to insert and check
acknowledge IDs.

==== Enabling the Client-side Message Acknowledgment Extension

The `dojox/cometd/ack.js` provides the client-side extension binding for Dojo,
and it is sufficient to use Dojo's `require()` mechanism:

====
[source,javascript]
----
require(["dojox/cometd", "dojox/cometd/ack"], function(cometd) {
    ...
});
----
====

The example above is valid also when using the `require()` syntax with jQuery.

The file `jquery.cometd-ack.js` provides the client-side extension binding for jQuery.
When you are not using the `require()` syntax, you must include the
implementation file and the jQuery extension binding
in the HTML page via the `<script>` tag:

====
[source,javascript]
----
<script type="text/javascript" src="AckExtension.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="jquery.cometd-ack.js"></script>
----
====

In both Dojo and jQuery extension bindings, the extension is registered on
the default `cometd` object under the name "ack".

Furthermore, you can programmatically disable/enable the extension before
initialization by setting the `ackEnabled` boolean field on the `cometd` object:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Disables the ack extension during handshake
cometd.ackEnabled = false;
cometd.init(cometdURL);
----
====

[[_extensions_acknowledge_details]]
==== Acknowledge Extension Details

To enable message acknowledgement, both client and server must indicate that
they support message acknowledgement.
This is negotiated during handshake.
On handshake, the client sends `{"ext":{"ack": "true"}}` to indicate that it
supports message acknowledgement.
If the server also supports message acknowledgement, it likewise replies with
`{"ext":{"ack": "true"}}`.

The extension does not insert ack IDs in every message, as this would impose
a significant burden on the server for messages sent to multiple clients
(which would need to be reserialized to JSON for each client). Instead the
ack ID is inserted in the `ext` field of the `/meta/connect` messages that
are associated with message delivery.
Each `/meta/connect` request contains the ack ID of the last received ack
response: `"ext":{"ack": 42}`.
Similarly, each `/meta/connect` response contains an ext ack ID that uniquely
identifies the batch of responses sent.

If a `/meta/connect` message is received with an ack ID lower that any
unacknowledged messages held by the extension, then these messages are
requeued prior to any more recently queued messages and the `/meta/connect`
response sent with a new ack ID.

It is important to note that message acknowledgement is guaranteed from
server to client only, and not from client to server.
This means that the ack extension guarantees that messages sent by the
server to the clients will be resent in case of temporary network failures
that produce loss of messages.
It does not guarantee however, that messages sent by the client will reach
the server.

[[_extensions_acknowledge_ordering]]
==== Message Ordering

Message ordering is not enforced by default by CometD.
A CometD server has two ways to deliver the messages present in the
`ServerSession` queue to its correspondent remote client:

* through `/meta/connect` responses
* through direct responses

Delivery through a `/meta/connect` response means that the server will
deliver the messages present in the `ServerSession` queue along with a
`/meta/connect` response, so that the messages delivered to the remote
client are: `[{/meta/connect response message}, {queued message 1}, {queued message 2}, ...]`.

Direct delivery depends on the transport.

For polling transports it means that the server will deliver the messages
present in the `ServerSession` queue along with some other response message
that is being processed in that moment.
For example, let's assume that `clientA` is already subscribed to channel
`/foo`, and that it wants to subscribe also to channel `/bar`.
Then `clientA` sends a subscription request for channel `/bar` to the server,
and just before processing the subscription request for channel`/bar`, the
server receives a message on channel `/foo`, that therefore needs to be
delivered to `clientA` (for example, `clientB` published a message to channel
`/foo`, or an external system produced a message on channel `/foo`). The message
on channel `/foo` gets queued on `clientA`'s `ServerSession`.
However, the server notices that it has to reply to subscription request for
`/bar`, so it includes the message on channel `/foo` in that response, thus
avoiding to wake up the `/meta/connect`, so that the messages delivered to the
remote client are: `[{subscription response message for /bar}, {queued message on /foo}]`.

For non-polling transports such as `websocket` the server will just deliver
the messages present in the `ServerSession` queue without waking up the
`/meta/connect`, because non-polling transports have a way to send
server-to-client messages without the need to have a pending response onto
which the `ServerSession`'s queued messages are piggybacked.

These two ways of delivering messages compete each other to deliver messages
with the smallest latency.
Therefore it is possible that a server receives from an external system two
messages to be delivered for the same client, say `message1` first and then
`message2`; `message1` is queued and immediately dequeued by a direct delivery,
while `message2` is queued and then dequeued by a `/meta/connect` delivery.
The client may see `message2` arriving before `message1`, for example because
the thread scheduling on the server favored `message2`'s processing or because
the TCP communication for `message1` was somehow slowed down (not to mention
that browsers could as well be source of uncertainty).

To enable just server-to-client message ordering (but not reliability), you
need to configure the server with the `metaConnectDeliverOnly` parameter, as
explained in xref:_java_server_configuration[the java server configuration section].

When server-to-client message ordering is enabled, all messages will be
delivered through `meta/connect` responses.
In the example above, `message1` will be delivered to the client, and
`message2` will wait on the server until another `meta/connect` is issued by
the client (which happens immediately after `message1` has been received by
the client). When the server receives the second `meta/connect` request, it
will respond to it immediately and deliver `message2` to the client.

It is clear that server-to-client message ordering comes at the small price
of slightly increased latencies (`message2` has to wait the next `meta/connect`
before being delivered), and slightly more activity for the server (since
`meta/connect` will be resumed more frequently than normal).

==== Demo

There is an example of acknowledged messages in the Dojo chat demo that comes
bundled with the CometD distribution, and instruction on how to run the CometD
demos in xref:_installation_demos[the installation demos section].

To run the acknowledgement demo, follow these steps:

. Start CometD
+
====
[source]
----
$ cd cometd-demo
$ mvn jetty:run
----
====
. Point your browser to http://localhost:8080/dojo-examples/chat/ and make
  sure to check _Enable reliable messaging_
. Use two different browser instances to begin a chat session, then briefly
  disconnect one browser from the network
. While one browser is disconnected, type some chat in the other browser,
  which is received when the disconnected browser reconnects to the network.

Notice that if the disconnected browser is disconnected in excess of `maxInterval`
(default 10s), the client times out and the unacknowledged queue is discarded.
