cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/extensions_timesync.adoc, before:


[[_extensions_timesync]]
=== Timesync Extension

The timesync extension uses the messages exchanged between a client and a
server to calculate the offset between the client's clock and the server's clock.
This is independent from <<_extensions_timestamp,the timestamp extension section>>,
which uses the local clock for all timestamps.
This extension requires both a client-side extension and a server-side extension.
The server-side extension is available in Java.

==== Enabling the Server-side Extension

To enable support for time synchronization, you must add the extension to the
`org.cometd.bayeux.server.BayeuxServer` instance during initialization:

====
[source,java]
----
bayeuxServer.addExtension(new org.cometd.server.ext.TimesyncExtension());
----
====

==== Enabling the Client-side Extension

The `dojox/cometd/timesync.js` provides the client-side extension binding for
Dojo, and it is sufficient to use Dojo's `dojo.require` mechanism:

====
[source,javascript]
----
require(["dojox/cometd", "dojox/cometd/timesync"], function(cometd) {
    ...
});
----
====

The example above is valid also when using the `require()` syntax with jQuery.

The file `jquery.cometd-timesync.js` provides the client-side extension binding
for jQuery.
When you are not using the `require()` syntax, you must include the
implementation file and the jQuery extension binding
in the HTML page via the `<script>` tag:

====
[source,javascript]
----
<script type="text/javascript" src="TimeSyncExtension.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="jquery.cometd-timesync.js"></script>
----
====

In both Dojo and jQuery extension bindings, the extension is registered on
the default `cometd` object under the name "timesync".

==== Understanding Timesync Extension Details

The timesync extension allows the client and server to exchange time information
on every handshake and connect message so that the client can calculate an
approximate offset from its own clock epoch to that of the server.
The algorithm used is very similar to the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Time_Protocol[NTP algorithm].

With each handshake or connect, the extension sends timestamps within the
ext field, for example:

====
[source,javascript]
----
{ext:{timesync:{tc:12345567890,l:23,o:4567},...},...}
----
====

where:

* _tc_ is the client timestamp in ms since 1970 of when the message was sent
* _l_ is the network lag that the client has calculated
* _o_ is the clock offset that the client has calculated

You can calculate the accuracy of the offset and lag with `tc-now-l-o`, which
should be zero if the calculated offset and lag are perfectly accurate.
A Bayeux server that supports timesync should respond only if the measured
accuracy value is greater than accuracy target.

The response is an `ext` field, for example:

====
[source,javascript]
----
{ext:{timesync:{tc:12345567890,ts:1234567900,p:123,a:3},...},...}
----
====

where:

* _tc_ is the client timestamp of when the message was sent
* _ts_ is the server timestamp of when the message was received
* _p_ is the poll duration in ms – ie the time the server took before sending the response
* _a_ is the measured accuracy of the calculated offset and lag sent by the client

On receipt of the response, the client is able to use current time to determine
the total trip time, from which it subtracts _p_ to determine an approximate two
way network traversal time.
Thus:

* lag = (now-tc-p)/2
* offset = ts-tc-lag

To smooth over any transient fluctuations, the extension keeps a sliding average
of the offsets received.
By default this is over ten messages, but you can change this value by passing a
configuration object during the creation of the extension:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Unregister the default timesync extension
cometd.unregisterExtension('timesync');

// Re-register with different configuration
cometd.registerExtension('timesync', new org.cometd.TimeSyncExtension({ maxSamples: 20 }));
----
====

The client-side timesync extension also exposes several functions to deal with
the result of the time synchronization:

* `getNetworkLag()` – to obtain the calculated network latency between client and server
* `getTimeOffset()` – to obtain the offset between the client's clock and the server's clock in ms
* `getServerTime()` – to obtain the server's time
* `setTimeout()` – to schedule a function to be executed at a certain server time

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/extensions_timesync.adoc, after:


[[_extensions_timesync]]
=== Timesync Extension

The timesync extension uses the messages exchanged between a client and a
server to calculate the offset between the client's clock and the server's clock.
This is independent from xref:_extensions_timestamp[the timestamp extension section],
which uses the local clock for all timestamps.
This extension requires both a client-side extension and a server-side extension.
The server-side extension is available in Java.

==== Enabling the Server-side Extension

To enable support for time synchronization, you must add the extension to the
`org.cometd.bayeux.server.BayeuxServer` instance during initialization:

====
[source,java]
----
bayeuxServer.addExtension(new org.cometd.server.ext.TimesyncExtension());
----
====

==== Enabling the Client-side Extension

The `dojox/cometd/timesync.js` provides the client-side extension binding for
Dojo, and it is sufficient to use Dojo's `dojo.require` mechanism:

====
[source,javascript]
----
require(["dojox/cometd", "dojox/cometd/timesync"], function(cometd) {
    ...
});
----
====

The example above is valid also when using the `require()` syntax with jQuery.

The file `jquery.cometd-timesync.js` provides the client-side extension binding
for jQuery.
When you are not using the `require()` syntax, you must include the
implementation file and the jQuery extension binding
in the HTML page via the `<script>` tag:

====
[source,javascript]
----
<script type="text/javascript" src="TimeSyncExtension.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="jquery.cometd-timesync.js"></script>
----
====

In both Dojo and jQuery extension bindings, the extension is registered on
the default `cometd` object under the name "timesync".

==== Understanding Timesync Extension Details

The timesync extension allows the client and server to exchange time information
on every handshake and connect message so that the client can calculate an
approximate offset from its own clock epoch to that of the server.
The algorithm used is very similar to the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Time_Protocol[NTP algorithm].

With each handshake or connect, the extension sends timestamps within the
ext field, for example:

====
[source,javascript]
----
{ext:{timesync:{tc:12345567890,l:23,o:4567},...},...}
----
====

where:

* _tc_ is the client timestamp in ms since 1970 of when the message was sent
* _l_ is the network lag that the client has calculated
* _o_ is the clock offset that the client has calculated

You can calculate the accuracy of the offset and lag with `tc-now-l-o`, which
should be zero if the calculated offset and lag are perfectly accurate.
A Bayeux server that supports timesync should respond only if the measured
accuracy value is greater than accuracy target.

The response is an `ext` field, for example:

====
[source,javascript]
----
{ext:{timesync:{tc:12345567890,ts:1234567900,p:123,a:3},...},...}
----
====

where:

* _tc_ is the client timestamp of when the message was sent
* _ts_ is the server timestamp of when the message was received
* _p_ is the poll duration in ms – ie the time the server took before sending the response
* _a_ is the measured accuracy of the calculated offset and lag sent by the client

On receipt of the response, the client is able to use current time to determine
the total trip time, from which it subtracts _p_ to determine an approximate two
way network traversal time.
Thus:

* lag = (now-tc-p)/2
* offset = ts-tc-lag

To smooth over any transient fluctuations, the extension keeps a sliding average
of the offsets received.
By default this is over ten messages, but you can change this value by passing a
configuration object during the creation of the extension:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Unregister the default timesync extension
cometd.unregisterExtension('timesync');

// Re-register with different configuration
cometd.registerExtension('timesync', new org.cometd.TimeSyncExtension({ maxSamples: 20 }));
----
====

The client-side timesync extension also exposes several functions to deal with
the result of the time synchronization:

* `getNetworkLag()` – to obtain the calculated network latency between client and server
* `getTimeOffset()` – to obtain the offset between the client's clock and the server's clock in ms
* `getServerTime()` – to obtain the server's time
* `setTimeout()` – to schedule a function to be executed at a certain server time
