cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/installation.adoc, before:


[[_installation]]
== Installation

=== Requirements and Dependencies

In order to run CometD applications, you need the Java Development Kit
(JDK) – version 8 or greater, and a compliant Servlet 3.0 or greater
Servlet Container such as http://eclipse.org/jetty[Jetty].

The CometD implementation depends on few Jetty libraries, such as
`jetty-util-ajax-<version>.jar` and others.
These Jetty dependencies are typically packaged in the `WEB-INF/lib`
directory of your application `.war` file, and do not require you to
deploy your application `.war` file in Jetty: your CometD-based application
will work exactly in the same way in any other compliant Servlet 3.0 or
greater Servlet Container.

The current Jetty version CometD depends on by default is:

[source,xml,indent=0]
----
include::{resources}/pom.xml[tags=jetty-version]
----

=== Downloading and Installing

You can download the CometD distribution from http://download.cometd.org/.

Then unpack the distribution in a directory of your choice:

----
$ tar zxvf cometd-<version>-distribution.tgz
$ cd cometd-<version>/
----

[[_installation_demos]]
=== Running the Demos

The CometD Demos contain:

* Four full chat applications (one developed with vanilla Javascript, on with Dojo, one with jQuery and one with Angular 1).
* Examples of extensions such as message acknowledgement, reload, timesync and timestamp.
* An example of how to echo private messages to a particular client only.
* A clustered auction demo (using the <<_oort,Oort clustering>>).

==== Running the Demos with Maven

This mode of running the CometD Demos is suggested if you want to take a quick
look at the CometD Demos and if you are prototyping/experimenting with your
application, but it's not the recommended way to deploy a CometD application
in production. See the <<_installation_jetty,next section>> for the suggested
way to deploy your CometD application in production.

Maven requires you to set up the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to point to
your JDK installation.

After that, running the CometD demos is very simple.
Assuming that `$COMETD` is the CometD installation directory, and that you have
the `mvn` executable in your path:

----
$ cd $COMETD
$ cd cometd-demo
$ mvn jetty:run
----

The last command starts an embedded Jetty that listens on port 8080.
Now point your browser to http://localhost:8080, to see the CometD Demos main page.

=== Deploying your CometD Application

When you develop a CometD application, you develop a standard Java EE Web Application
that is then packaged into a `.war` file.
You can follow <<_primer,the Primer section>> or the
http://docs.cometd.org/tutorials[CometD Tutorials] for examples of how to build
and package your CometD application.

Once you have your CometD application packaged into a `.war` file, you can
deploy it to a any Servlet Container that supports Servlet 3.0 or greater.

Refer to <<_java_server_configuration_servlet_30,this section>> for further
information and for specific instructions related to deployment on Servlet 3.0
(or greater) Containers.

[[_installation_jetty]]
==== Deploying your CometD Application in Standalone Jetty

The instructions below describe a very minimal Jetty setup that is needed
to run CometD applications.
Refer to the official http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/[Jetty documentation]
for further details about configuring Jetty.

Follow these steps to deploy your CometD application into Jetty.
These instructions are valid for Unix/Linux operative systems,
but can be easily translated for the Windows operative system.

Download the Jetty distribution from the
http://download.eclipse.org/jetty[Eclipse Jetty Downloads].

Then unpack the Jetty distribution in a directory of your choice,
for example `/tmp`:

----
$ cd /tmp
$ tar zxvf jetty-distribution-<version>.tar.gz
----

This creates a directory called `/tmp/jetty-distribution-<version>/`
that is referred to as the `JETTY_HOME`.

Create another directory of your choice, for example in your home
directory:

----
$ cd ~
$ mkdir jetty_cometd
----

This creates a directory called `~/jetty_cometd` that is referred to as
the `JETTY_BASE`.

Since Jetty is a highly modular Servlet Container, the `JETTY_BASE` is
the directory where you configure Jetty with the Jetty modules that are
needed to run your CometD application.

In order to run CometD applications, Jetty needs to be configured with
these modules:

* the `http` module, that provides support for the HTTP protocol
* the `websocket` module, that provides support for the WebSocket protocol
* the `deploy` module, that provides support for the deployment of `.war`
  files

Therefore:

----
$ cd $JETTY_BASE
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-to-start=http,websocket,deploy
----

Now Jetty is configured to run CometD applications, and you just need
to deploy your `.war` file to Jetty (you can use the CometD Demos `.war`
file if you have not built your application yet):

----
$ cp /path/to/cometd_application.war $JETTY_BASE/webapps/
----

Now you can start Jetty:

----
$ cd $JETTY_BASE
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar
----

This last command starts Jetty, which deploys your `.war` file and makes
your CometD application "live".

[[_installation_jetty_embedded]]
==== Deploying your CometD Application using Embedded Jetty

You can also deploy your CometD application programmatically, using the Jetty
APIs to embed your web application as a normal Java application that you
would start via command line.

Below you can find an {github}/cometd-demo/src/test/java/org/cometd/demo/Demo.java[example] 
that shows how to setup Jetty embedded and CometD with support for HTTP, 
HTTPS and WebSocket transports:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{resources}/Demo.java[tags=embedded-cometd]
----

[NOTE]
====
If you application needs to use a WebSocket client to connect to other services,
you may get `NoSuchMethodError` thrown at startup.

If that is the case, it is due to the fact that artifact (in the Maven format
`<groupId>:<artifactId>`) `org.cometd.java:cometd-java-websocket-jetty-client`
depends on the Jetty artifact `org.eclipse.jetty.websocket:websocket-client` with
classifier `hybrid`.

The `hybrid` version of this artifact is for use inside web applications
deployed as `war` files, the typical CometD web application deployment.

For use in embedded mode, you must not use the `hybrid` version of the artifact,
but the regular version of the artifact.
This is normally accomplished by explicitly excluding the `hybrid` version
and explicitly including the regular version of the artifact.

For example, using Maven:

[source,xml]
----
<dependencies>
    ...
    <!-- Explicitly exclude the hybrid dependency. -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.cometd.java</groupId>
        <artifactId>cometd-java-websocket-jetty-client</artifactId>
        <version>${cometd.version}</version>
        <exclusions>
            <exclusion>
                <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty.websocket</groupId>
                <artifactId>websocket-client</artifactId>
            </exclusion>
        </exclusions>
    </dependency>
    <!-- Explicitly include the regular dependency. -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty.websocket</groupId>
        <artifactId>websocket-client</artifactId>
        <version>${jetty.version}</version>
    </dependency>
    ...
</dependencies>
----
====


==== Running the Demos with Another Servlet Container

Steps similar to what described above for Jetty are what you need to do
to deploy your CometD application to different Servlet Containers.

Refer to the specific Servlet Container configuration manual for how to deploy
the CometD application `.war` file in the Servlet Container of your choice.

Commit message:

Fixes #811 - CometD Demo on HTTP/2 with Maven Jetty Plugin.
Added external configuration files for connectors, supporting
HTTP/2 with Conscrypt on JDK 8 and JDK 11.

Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/installation.adoc, after:


[[_installation]]
== Installation

=== Requirements and Dependencies

In order to run CometD applications, you need the Java Development Kit
(JDK) – version 8 or greater, and a compliant Servlet 3.0 or greater
Servlet Container such as http://eclipse.org/jetty[Jetty].

The CometD implementation depends on few Jetty libraries, such as
`jetty-util-ajax-<version>.jar` and others.
These Jetty dependencies are typically packaged in the `WEB-INF/lib`
directory of your application `.war` file, and do not require you to
deploy your application `.war` file in Jetty: your CometD-based application
will work exactly in the same way in any other compliant Servlet 3.0 or
greater Servlet Container.

The current Jetty version CometD depends on by default is:

[source,xml,indent=0]
----
include::{resources}/pom.xml[tags=jetty-version]
----

=== Downloading and Installing

You can download the CometD distribution from http://download.cometd.org/.

Then unpack the distribution in a directory of your choice:

----
$ tar zxvf cometd-<version>-distribution.tgz
$ cd cometd-<version>/
----

[[_installation_demos]]
=== Running the Demos

The CometD Demos contain:

* Four full chat applications (one developed with vanilla Javascript, on with Dojo, one with jQuery and one with Angular 1).
* Examples of extensions such as message acknowledgement, reload, timesync and timestamp.
* An example of how to echo private messages to a particular client only.
* A clustered auction demo (using the <<_oort,Oort clustering>>).

==== Running the Demos with Maven

This mode of running the CometD Demos is suggested if you want to take a quick
look at the CometD Demos and if you are prototyping/experimenting with your
application, but it's not the recommended way to deploy a CometD application
in production. See the <<_installation_jetty,next section>> for the suggested
way to deploy your CometD application in production.

Maven requires you to set up the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to point to
your JDK installation.

After that, running the CometD demos is very simple.
Assuming that `$COMETD` is the CometD installation directory, and that you have
the `mvn` executable in your path:

----
$ cd $COMETD
$ cd cometd-demo
$ mvn jetty:run
----

The last command starts an embedded Jetty server that listens on port 8080 for clear-text
HTTP/1.1 (`http`) and on port 8443 for both encrypted HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2 (`https`).
Now point your browser to http://localhost:8080 or to https://localhost:8443 to see
the CometD Demos main page.

When connecting using `https`, the browser may display a page that says something
like "Your connection is not secure" or "This site is not secure".
Don't worry, this message is due to the fact that the CometD Demos use a self-signed
certificate to encrypt the traffic between the browser and the embedded Jetty server.
The browser will display a button or a link to consider the site safe and you will be
able to continue to the CometD Demos main page.

=== Deploying your CometD Application

When you develop a CometD application, you develop a standard Java EE Web Application
that is then packaged into a `.war` file.
You can follow <<_primer,the Primer section>> or the
http://docs.cometd.org/tutorials[CometD Tutorials] for examples of how to build
and package your CometD application.

Once you have your CometD application packaged into a `.war` file, you can
deploy it to a any Servlet Container that supports Servlet 3.0 or greater.

Refer to <<_java_server_configuration_servlet_30,this section>> for further
information and for specific instructions related to deployment on Servlet 3.0
(or greater) Containers.

[[_installation_jetty]]
==== Deploying your CometD Application in Standalone Jetty

The instructions below describe a very minimal Jetty setup that is needed
to run CometD applications.
Refer to the official http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/[Jetty documentation]
for further details about configuring Jetty.

Follow these steps to deploy your CometD application into Jetty.
These instructions are valid for Unix/Linux operative systems,
but can be easily translated for the Windows operative system.

Download the Jetty distribution from the
http://download.eclipse.org/jetty[Eclipse Jetty Downloads].

Then unpack the Jetty distribution in a directory of your choice,
for example `/tmp`:

----
$ cd /tmp
$ tar zxvf jetty-distribution-<version>.tar.gz
----

This creates a directory called `/tmp/jetty-distribution-<version>/`
that is referred to as the `JETTY_HOME`.

Create another directory of your choice, for example in your home
directory:

----
$ cd ~
$ mkdir jetty_cometd
----

This creates a directory called `~/jetty_cometd` that is referred to as
the `JETTY_BASE`.

Since Jetty is a highly modular Servlet Container, the `JETTY_BASE` is
the directory where you configure Jetty with the Jetty modules that are
needed to run your CometD application.

In order to run CometD applications, Jetty needs to be configured with
these modules:

* the `http` module, that provides support for the HTTP protocol
* the `websocket` module, that provides support for the WebSocket protocol
* the `deploy` module, that provides support for the deployment of `.war`
  files

Therefore:

----
$ cd $JETTY_BASE
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-to-start=http,websocket,deploy
----

Now Jetty is configured to run CometD applications, and you just need
to deploy your `.war` file to Jetty (you can use the CometD Demos `.war`
file if you have not built your application yet):

----
$ cp /path/to/cometd_application.war $JETTY_BASE/webapps/
----

Now you can start Jetty:

----
$ cd $JETTY_BASE
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar
----

This last command starts Jetty, which deploys your `.war` file and makes
your CometD application "live".

[[_installation_jetty_embedded]]
==== Deploying your CometD Application using Embedded Jetty

You can also deploy your CometD application programmatically, using the Jetty
APIs to embed your web application as a normal Java application that you
would start via command line.

Below you can find an {github}/cometd-demo/src/test/java/org/cometd/demo/Demo.java[example] 
that shows how to setup Jetty embedded and CometD with support for HTTP, 
HTTPS and WebSocket transports:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{resources}/Demo.java[tags=embedded-cometd]
----

[NOTE]
====
If you application needs to use a WebSocket client to connect to other services,
you may get `NoSuchMethodError` thrown at startup.

If that is the case, it is due to the fact that artifact (in the Maven format
`<groupId>:<artifactId>`) `org.cometd.java:cometd-java-websocket-jetty-client`
depends on the Jetty artifact `org.eclipse.jetty.websocket:websocket-client` with
classifier `hybrid`.

The `hybrid` version of this artifact is for use inside web applications
deployed as `war` files, the typical CometD web application deployment.

For use in embedded mode, you must not use the `hybrid` version of the artifact,
but the regular version of the artifact.
This is normally accomplished by explicitly excluding the `hybrid` version
and explicitly including the regular version of the artifact.

For example, using Maven:

[source,xml]
----
<dependencies>
    ...
    <!-- Explicitly exclude the hybrid dependency. -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.cometd.java</groupId>
        <artifactId>cometd-java-websocket-jetty-client</artifactId>
        <version>${cometd.version}</version>
        <exclusions>
            <exclusion>
                <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty.websocket</groupId>
                <artifactId>websocket-client</artifactId>
            </exclusion>
        </exclusions>
    </dependency>
    <!-- Explicitly include the regular dependency. -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty.websocket</groupId>
        <artifactId>websocket-client</artifactId>
        <version>${jetty.version}</version>
    </dependency>
    ...
</dependencies>
----
====


==== Running the Demos with Another Servlet Container

Steps similar to what described above for Jetty are what you need to do
to deploy your CometD application to different Servlet Containers.

Refer to the specific Servlet Container configuration manual for how to deploy
the CometD application `.war` file in the Servlet Container of your choice.
