cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_lazy_messages.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_lazy_messages]]
==== Lazy Channels and Messages

Sometimes applications need to send non-urgent messages to clients; alert
messages such as "email received" or "server uptime", are typical examples,
but chat messages sometimes also fit this definition.
While these messages need to reach the client(s) eventually, there is no need
to deliver them immediately: they are queued into the `ServerSession` message
queue, but their delivery can be postponed to the first occasion.

In CometD, "first occasion" means whichever of the following things occurs first
(see also <<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>> for
information about configuring the following parameters):

* the channel's lazy timeout expires
* the `/meta/connect` timeout expires so that the `/meta/connect` response is
  sent to the client
* another non-lazy message triggered the `ServerSession` message queue to be
  sent to the client

To support this feature, CometD introduces the concepts of _lazy channel_ and
_lazy messages_.

An application can mark a message as lazy by calling `ServerMessage.Mutable.setLazy(true)`
on the message instance itself, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class LazyService {
    @Inject
    private BayeuxServer bayeuxServer;
    @Session
    private LocalSession session;

    public void receiveNewsFromExternalSystem(NewsInfo news) {
        ServerMessage.Mutable message = this.bayeuxServer.newMessage();
        message.setChannel("/news");
        message.setData(news);
        message.setLazy(true);
        this.bayeuxServer.getChannel("/news").publish(this.session, message, Promise.noop());
    }
}
----
====

In this example, an external system invokes method `LazyService.receiveNewsFromExternalSystem(...)`
every time there is news, and the service broadcasts the news to all interested clients.
However, since the news need not be delivered immediately, the message is marked as lazy.
Each remote client possibly receives the message at a different time: some
receive it immediately (because, for example, they have other non-lazy messages
to be delivered), some receive it after few milliseconds (because, for example,
their `/meta/connect` timeout expires in a few milliseconds), while others receive
it only upon the whole `maxLazyInterval` timeout.

In the same way you can mark a message as lazy, you can also mark server channels as lazy.
Every message that is published to a lazy channel becomes a lazy message which
is then queued into the `ServerSession`'s message queue for delivery on first occasion.

You can mark server channels as lazy at any time, but it is best to configure
them as lazy at creation time, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class LazyService {
    @Inject
    private BayeuxServer bayeuxServer;
    @Session
    private LocalSession session;

    @Configure("/news")
    public void setupNewsChannel(ConfigurableServerChannel channel) {
        channel.setLazy(true);
    }

    public void receiveNewsFromExternalSystem(NewsInfo news) {
        this.bayeuxServer.getChannel("/news").publish(this.session, news, Promise.noop());
    }
}
----
====

When a server channel is marked lazy, by default it has a lazy timeout
specified by the global `maxLazyTimeout` parameter (see also
<<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>>).

In more sophisticated cases, you may want to specify different lazy timeouts
for different server channels, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class LazyService {
    ...

    @Configure("/news")
    public void setupNewsChannel(ConfigurableServerChannel channel) {
        channel.setLazy(true);
    }

    @Configure("/chat")
    public void setupChatChannel(ConfigurableServerChannel channel) {
        channel.setLazyTimeout(2000);
    }

    ...
}
----
====

In the example above, channel `/news` inherits the default `maxLazyTimeout`
(5000 ms), while the `/chat` channel is configured with a specific lazy
timeout of 2000 ms.
A server channel that has a non-zero, positive lazy timeout is automatically
marked as lazy.

If a wildcard server channel such as `+/chat/*+` is marked as lazy, then all
messages sent to server channels that match that wildcard server channel
(such as `/chat/1`) will be lazy.
Conversely, if a non-wildcard server channel such as `/news` is lazy, then
all messages sent to children server channels of that non-wildcard server
channel (such as `/news/sport`) will not be lazy.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_lazy_messages.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_lazy_messages]]
==== Lazy Channels and Messages

Sometimes applications need to send non-urgent messages to clients; alert
messages such as "email received" or "server uptime", are typical examples,
but chat messages sometimes also fit this definition.
While these messages need to reach the client(s) eventually, there is no need
to deliver them immediately: they are queued into the `ServerSession` message
queue, but their delivery can be postponed to the first occasion.

In CometD, "first occasion" means whichever of the following things occurs first
(see also xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section] for
information about configuring the following parameters):

* the channel's lazy timeout expires
* the `/meta/connect` timeout expires so that the `/meta/connect` response is
  sent to the client
* another non-lazy message triggered the `ServerSession` message queue to be
  sent to the client

To support this feature, CometD introduces the concepts of _lazy channel_ and
_lazy messages_.

An application can mark a message as lazy by calling `ServerMessage.Mutable.setLazy(true)`
on the message instance itself, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class LazyService {
    @Inject
    private BayeuxServer bayeuxServer;
    @Session
    private LocalSession session;

    public void receiveNewsFromExternalSystem(NewsInfo news) {
        ServerMessage.Mutable message = this.bayeuxServer.newMessage();
        message.setChannel("/news");
        message.setData(news);
        message.setLazy(true);
        this.bayeuxServer.getChannel("/news").publish(this.session, message, Promise.noop());
    }
}
----
====

In this example, an external system invokes method `LazyService.receiveNewsFromExternalSystem(...)`
every time there is news, and the service broadcasts the news to all interested clients.
However, since the news need not be delivered immediately, the message is marked as lazy.
Each remote client possibly receives the message at a different time: some
receive it immediately (because, for example, they have other non-lazy messages
to be delivered), some receive it after few milliseconds (because, for example,
their `/meta/connect` timeout expires in a few milliseconds), while others receive
it only upon the whole `maxLazyInterval` timeout.

In the same way you can mark a message as lazy, you can also mark server channels as lazy.
Every message that is published to a lazy channel becomes a lazy message which
is then queued into the `ServerSession`'s message queue for delivery on first occasion.

You can mark server channels as lazy at any time, but it is best to configure
them as lazy at creation time, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class LazyService {
    @Inject
    private BayeuxServer bayeuxServer;
    @Session
    private LocalSession session;

    @Configure("/news")
    public void setupNewsChannel(ConfigurableServerChannel channel) {
        channel.setLazy(true);
    }

    public void receiveNewsFromExternalSystem(NewsInfo news) {
        this.bayeuxServer.getChannel("/news").publish(this.session, news, Promise.noop());
    }
}
----
====

When a server channel is marked lazy, by default it has a lazy timeout
specified by the global `maxLazyTimeout` parameter (see also
xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section]).

In more sophisticated cases, you may want to specify different lazy timeouts
for different server channels, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class LazyService {
    ...

    @Configure("/news")
    public void setupNewsChannel(ConfigurableServerChannel channel) {
        channel.setLazy(true);
    }

    @Configure("/chat")
    public void setupChatChannel(ConfigurableServerChannel channel) {
        channel.setLazyTimeout(2000);
    }

    ...
}
----
====

In the example above, channel `/news` inherits the default `maxLazyTimeout`
(5000 ms), while the `/chat` channel is configured with a specific lazy
timeout of 2000 ms.
A server channel that has a non-zero, positive lazy timeout is automatically
marked as lazy.

If a wildcard server channel such as `+/chat/*+` is marked as lazy, then all
messages sent to server channels that match that wildcard server channel
(such as `/chat/1`) will be lazy.
Conversely, if a non-wildcard server channel such as `/news` is lazy, then
all messages sent to children server channels of that non-wildcard server
channel (such as `/news/sport`) will not be lazy.
