cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_authorization.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_authorization]]
==== Authorization

You can configure the `BayeuxServer` object with an `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy`
object, which allows you to control various steps of the Bayeux protocol such
as handshake, subscription, and publish.
By default, the `BayeuxServer` object has a default `SecurityPolicy`, that
allows almost any operation.

The `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy` interface has a default
implementation in `org.cometd.server.DefaultSecurityPolicy`, that is useful
as a base class to customize the `SecurityPolicy`
(see <<_java_server_authentication,the authentication section>> for an example).

The `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy` methods are:

====
[source,java]
----
void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise);

void canCreate(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, String channelId, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise);

void canSubscribe(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerChannel channel, ServerMessage messsage, Promise<Boolean> promise);

void canPublish(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerChannel channel, ServerMessage messsage, Promise<Boolean> promise);
----
====

Those methods control, respectively, whether a handshake, a channel creation,
a subscription to a channel or a publish to a channel are to be authorized.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The `SecurityPolicy` methods are invoked for `ServerSession` that correspond
to both local clients and remote clients (see also <<_concepts_sessions,the sessions section>>).

Application code can determine whether a `ServerSession` correspond to a
local client by calling method `ServerSession.isLocalSession()`.

In almost all cases, local clients should be authorized because they are
created on the server by the application (for example, by services – see also
<<_java_server_services_inherited,the inherited services section>>) and
therefore are trusted clients.
====

The default implementation `org.cometd.server.DefaultSecurityPolicy`:

* Allows any handshake.
* Allows creation of a channel only from clients that performed a handshake,
and only if the channel is not a meta channel.
* Allows subscription from clients that performed a handshake, but not if
the channel is a meta channel.
* Allows publish from clients that performed a handshake to any channel that
is not a meta channel.

A typical custom `SecurityPolicy` may override the `canHandshake(...)`
method to control authentication:

====
[source,java]
----
public class CustomSecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        // Always allow local clients
        if (session.isLocalSession()) {
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        // Implement custom authentication logic
        boolean authenticated = authenticate(server, session, message);

        promise.succeed(authenticated);
    }
}
----
====

To understand how to install your custom `SecurityPolicy` on the `BayeuxServer`
object, see how it is done in <<_java_server_authentication,the authentication section>>.

Follow also <<_java_server_authorizers,the authorizers section>> for further
information about authorization.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_authorization.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_authorization]]
==== Authorization

You can configure the `BayeuxServer` object with an `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy`
object, which allows you to control various steps of the Bayeux protocol such
as handshake, subscription, and publish.
By default, the `BayeuxServer` object has a default `SecurityPolicy`, that
allows almost any operation.

The `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy` interface has a default
implementation in `org.cometd.server.DefaultSecurityPolicy`, that is useful
as a base class to customize the `SecurityPolicy`
(see xref:_java_server_authentication[the authentication section] for an example).

The `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy` methods are:

====
[source,java]
----
void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise);

void canCreate(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, String channelId, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise);

void canSubscribe(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerChannel channel, ServerMessage messsage, Promise<Boolean> promise);

void canPublish(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerChannel channel, ServerMessage messsage, Promise<Boolean> promise);
----
====

Those methods control, respectively, whether a handshake, a channel creation,
a subscription to a channel or a publish to a channel are to be authorized.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The `SecurityPolicy` methods are invoked for `ServerSession` that correspond
to both local clients and remote clients (see also xref:_concepts_sessions[the sessions section]).

Application code can determine whether a `ServerSession` correspond to a
local client by calling method `ServerSession.isLocalSession()`.

In almost all cases, local clients should be authorized because they are
created on the server by the application (for example, by services – see also
xref:_java_server_services_inherited[the inherited services section]) and
therefore are trusted clients.
====

The default implementation `org.cometd.server.DefaultSecurityPolicy`:

* Allows any handshake.
* Allows creation of a channel only from clients that performed a handshake,
and only if the channel is not a meta channel.
* Allows subscription from clients that performed a handshake, but not if
the channel is a meta channel.
* Allows publish from clients that performed a handshake to any channel that
is not a meta channel.

A typical custom `SecurityPolicy` may override the `canHandshake(...)`
method to control authentication:

====
[source,java]
----
public class CustomSecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        // Always allow local clients
        if (session.isLocalSession()) {
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        // Implement custom authentication logic
        boolean authenticated = authenticate(server, session, message);

        promise.succeed(authenticated);
    }
}
----
====

To understand how to install your custom `SecurityPolicy` on the `BayeuxServer`
object, see how it is done in xref:_java_server_authentication[the authentication section].

Follow also xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section] for further
information about authorization.
