cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_client_subscribe.adoc, before:


[[_java_client_subscribe]]
==== Subscribing and Unsubscribing

The following sections provide information about subscribing and unsubscribing to channels.

===== Subscribing to Broadcast Channels

Subscribing (or unsubscribing) involves first retrieving the channel you want
to subscribe to (or unsubscribe from) and then calling the `subscribe()` (or
`unsubscribe()`) methods:

====
[source,java]
----
public class Example {
    private static final String CHANNEL = "/foo";
    private final ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener fooListener = new FooListener();

    public void attach() {
        ClientTransport transport = ...
        ClientSession client = new BayeuxClient("http://localhost:8080/cometd", transport);
        client.handshake();
        boolean handshaken = client.waitFor(1000, BayeuxClient.State.CONNECTED);
        if (handshaken) {
            client.getChannel(CHANNEL).subscribe(fooListener);
        }
    }

    private static class FooListener implements ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener {
        public void onMessage(ClientSessionChannel channel, Message message) {
            // Here you received a message on the channel
        }
    }
}
----
====

[NOTE]
====
You can subscribe and unsubscribe only after the handshake is completed.
Calling `subscribe()` (or `unsubscribe()` _does not_ mean that you have completed
the subscription (or unsubscription) with the server when the method returns.
====

Unsubscribing is straightforward: if you unsubscribe to a channel, CometD does
not deliver messages on that channel to message listeners.
Using the `Example` class above:

====
[source,java]
----
public class Example {
    ...
    public void detach() {
        client.getChannel(CHANNEL).unsubscribe(fooListener);
    }
}
----
====

If you need to know whether your subscription (or unsubscription) was received
and processed by the server, you can pass a callback `MessageListener` to the
`subscribe()` (or `unsubscribe()`) methods:

====
[source,java]
----
BayeuxClient client = ...;
ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener messageHandler = ...;
client.handshake(handshake -> {
        if (handshake.isSuccessful()) {
            // Subscribe.
            client.getChannel("/foo").subscribe(messageHandler, subscribe -> {
                if (subscribe.isSuccessful()) {
                    // Subscription successful.
                }
            }
        }
    }
});
----
====

As in <<_javascript_subscribe,the JavaScript subscribe section>>, a good place
to perform subscriptions is a `handshake(...)` callback or a `/meta/handshake`
listener, because they are invoked transparently if the server requests a new handshake.

Applications do not need to unsubscribe in case of re-handshake; the CometD library
removes the subscriptions upon re-handshake, so that when the `/meta/handshake`
listener executes again the subscriptions are correctly restored (and not duplicated).

===== Listening to Meta Channels

The internal implementation of the Bayeux protocol uses meta channels, and it
does not make any sense to subscribe to them because they are not broadcast channels.
It does make sense, however, to listen to messages that arrive on those channels.

====
[source,java]
----
public class Example {
    public void init() {
        ClientSession client = ...;
        client.getChannel(Channel.META_HANDSHAKE).addListener((channel, message) -> {
            // Here you received a handshake response message
        });
    }
}
----
====

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_client_subscribe.adoc, after:


[[_java_client_subscribe]]
==== Subscribing and Unsubscribing

The following sections provide information about subscribing and unsubscribing to channels.

===== Subscribing to Broadcast Channels

Subscribing (or unsubscribing) involves first retrieving the channel you want
to subscribe to (or unsubscribe from) and then calling the `subscribe()` (or
`unsubscribe()`) methods:

====
[source,java]
----
public class Example {
    private static final String CHANNEL = "/foo";
    private final ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener fooListener = new FooListener();

    public void attach() {
        ClientTransport transport = ...
        ClientSession client = new BayeuxClient("http://localhost:8080/cometd", transport);
        client.handshake();
        boolean handshaken = client.waitFor(1000, BayeuxClient.State.CONNECTED);
        if (handshaken) {
            client.getChannel(CHANNEL).subscribe(fooListener);
        }
    }

    private static class FooListener implements ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener {
        public void onMessage(ClientSessionChannel channel, Message message) {
            // Here you received a message on the channel
        }
    }
}
----
====

[NOTE]
====
You can subscribe and unsubscribe only after the handshake is completed.
Calling `subscribe()` (or `unsubscribe()` _does not_ mean that you have completed
the subscription (or unsubscription) with the server when the method returns.
====

Unsubscribing is straightforward: if you unsubscribe to a channel, CometD does
not deliver messages on that channel to message listeners.
Using the `Example` class above:

====
[source,java]
----
public class Example {
    ...
    public void detach() {
        client.getChannel(CHANNEL).unsubscribe(fooListener);
    }
}
----
====

If you need to know whether your subscription (or unsubscription) was received
and processed by the server, you can pass a callback `MessageListener` to the
`subscribe()` (or `unsubscribe()`) methods:

====
[source,java]
----
BayeuxClient client = ...;
ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener messageHandler = ...;
client.handshake(handshake -> {
        if (handshake.isSuccessful()) {
            // Subscribe.
            client.getChannel("/foo").subscribe(messageHandler, subscribe -> {
                if (subscribe.isSuccessful()) {
                    // Subscription successful.
                }
            }
        }
    }
});
----
====

As in xref:_javascript_subscribe[the JavaScript subscribe section], a good place
to perform subscriptions is a `handshake(...)` callback or a `/meta/handshake`
listener, because they are invoked transparently if the server requests a new handshake.

Applications do not need to unsubscribe in case of re-handshake; the CometD library
removes the subscriptions upon re-handshake, so that when the `/meta/handshake`
listener executes again the subscriptions are correctly restored (and not duplicated).

===== Listening to Meta Channels

The internal implementation of the Bayeux protocol uses meta channels, and it
does not make any sense to subscribe to them because they are not broadcast channels.
It does make sense, however, to listen to messages that arrive on those channels.

====
[source,java]
----
public class Example {
    public void init() {
        ClientSession client = ...;
        client.getChannel(Channel.META_HANDSHAKE).addListener((channel, message) -> {
            // Here you received a handshake response message
        });
    }
}
----
====
