cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_authentication.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_authentication]]
==== Authentication

Authentication is a complex task, and can be achieved in many ways, and most
often each way is peculiar to a particular application.
That is why CometD does not provide an out of the box solution for authentication
but provides APIs that applications can use to implement in few steps their
own authentication mechanism.

The recommended way to perform authentication in CometD is to pass the
authentication credentials in the initial handshake message.

Both the <<_javascript_handshake,JavaScript handshake API>> and the
<<_java_client_handshake,Java Client handshake API>> allow an application to
pass an additional object that will be merged into the handshake message and
sent to the server:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/myapp/cometd'
});

// Register a listener to be notified of authentication success or failure
cometd.addListener('/meta/handshake', function(message) {
    var authn = message.ext && message.ext['com.myapp.authn'];
    if (authn && authn.failed === true) {
        // Authentication failed, tell the user
        window.alert('Authentication failed!');
    }
});

var username = 'foo';
var password = 'bar';

// Send the authentication information
cometd.handshake({
    ext: {
        com.myapp.authn: {
            user: username,
            credentials: password
        }
    }
});
----
====

The Bayeux Protocol specification suggests that the authentication information
is stored in the `ext` field of the handshake message (see
<<_bayeux_security,here>>) and it is good practice to use a fully qualified
name for the extension field, such as `com.myapp.authn`.

On the server, you need to configure the `BayeuxServer` object with an implementation
of `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy` to deny the handshake to clients
that provide wrong credentials.

<<_java_server_services_integration,The section on services integration>> shows
how to perform the initialization and configuration of the `BayeuxServer` object,
and you can use similar code to configure the `SecurityPolicy` too, for example
below using a configuration servlet:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MyAppInitializer extends GenericServlet {
    @Override
    public void init() throws ServletException {
        BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)getServletContext().getAttribute(BayeuxServer.ATTRIBUTE);
        MyAppAuthenticator authenticator = new MyAppAuthenticator();
        bayeux.setSecurityPolicy(authenticator);
    }

    @Override
    public void service(ServletRequest req, ServletResponse res) throws ServletException, IOException {
        throw new ServletException();
    }
}
----
====

Below you can find the code for the `MyAppAuthenticator` class referenced above:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MyAppAuthenticator extends DefaultSecurityPolicy implements ServerSession.RemoveListener { <1>
    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) { <2>
        if (session.isLocalSession()) { <3>
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> ext = message.getExt();
        if (ext == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> authentication = (Map<String, Object>)ext.get("com.myapp.authn");
        if (authentication == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        Object authenticationData = verify(authentication); <4>
        if (authenticationData == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        // Authentication successful

        // Link authentication data to the session <5>

        // Be notified when the session disappears
        session.addListener(this); <6>

        promise.succeed(true);
    }

    public void removed(ServerSession session, boolean expired) { <7>
        // Unlink authentication data from the remote client <8>
    }
}
----
====
<1> Make `MyAppAuthenticator` be a `SecurityPolicy` and a `ServerSession.RemoveListener`,
since the code is really tied together.
<2> Override `SecurityPolicy.canHandshake()`, to extract the authentication
information from the message sent by the client.
<3> Allow handshakes for any server-side local session (such as those associated with
<<_java_server_services,services>>).
<4> Verify the authentication information sent by the client, and obtain back
server-side authentication data that you can later associate with the remote client.
<5> Link the server-side authentication data to the session.
<6> Register a listener to be notified when the remote session disappears
(which you will react to in step 8).
<7> Implement `RemoveListener.removed()`, which is called when the remote session
disappears, either because it disconnected or because it crashed.
<8> Unlink the server-side authentication data from the remote client object,
the operation opposite to step 5.

The most important steps are the number 5 and the number 8, where the
server-side authentication data is linked/unlinked to/from the
`org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerSession` object.

This linking depends very much from application to application.
It may link a database primary key (of the row representing the user account)
with the remote session id (obtained with session.getId()), and/or viceversa,
or it may link OAUTH tokens with the remote session id, etc.

The linking should be performed by some other object that can then be used by
other code of the application, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MyAppAuthenticator extends DefaultSecurityPolicy implements ServerSession.RemoveListener {
    private final Users users;

    public MyAppAuthenticator(Users users) {
        this.users = users;
    }

    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (session.isLocalSession()) {
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> ext = message.getExt();
        if (ext == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> authentication = (Map<String, Object>)ext.get("com.myapp.authn");
        if (authentication == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        if (!verify(authentication)) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        // Authentication successful.

        // Link authentication data to the session.
        users.put(session, authentication);

        // Be notified when the session disappears.
        session.addListener(this);

        promise.succeed(true);
    }

    public void removed(ServerSession session, boolean expired) {
        // Unlink authentication data from the remote client
        users.remove(session);
    }
}
----
====

And below you can find a very simple implementation of the `Users` class:

====
[source,java]
----
public class Users {
    private final ConcurrentMap<String, ServerSession> users = new ConcurrentHashMap<>();

    public void put(ServerSession session, Map<String, Object> credentials) {
        String user = (String)credentials.get("user");
        users.put(user, session);
    }

    public void remove(ServerSession session) {
        users.values().remove(session);
    }
}
----
====

The `Users` object can now be injected in <<_java_server_services,CometD services>>
and its API enriched to fit the application needs such as retrieving the user
name for a given session, or the `ServerSession` for a given user name, etc.

Alternatively, the linking/unlinking (steps 5 and 8 above) can be performed in a
`BayeuxServer.SessionListener`. These listeners are invoked _after_
`SecurityPolicy.canHandshake()` and are invoked also when a `ServerSession` is
removed, therefore there is no need to register a `RemoveListener` with the
`ServerSession` like done in step 6 above:

====
[source,java]
----
BayeuxServer bayeuxServer = ...;

final Users users = ...;

bayeuxServer.addListener(new BayeuxServer.SessionListener() {
    public void sessionAdded(ServerSession session, ServerMessage message) {
        Map<String, Object> authentication = (Map<String, Object>)ext.get("com.myapp.authn");
        users.put(session, authentication);
    }

    public void sessionRemoved(ServerSession session, boolean timedout) {
        users.remove(session);
    }
});
----
====

Each Bayeux message always come with a session id, which can be thought as
similar to the HTTP session id.
In the same way it is widespread practice to put the server-side authentication
data in the `HttpSession` object (identified by the HTTP session id), in CometD
web applications you can put server-side authentication data in the `ServerSession`
object.

The Bayeux session ids are long, randomly generated numbers, exactly like HTTP
session ids, and offer the same level security offered by a HTTP session id.
If an attacker manages to sniff a Bayeux session id, it can impersonate that
Bayeux session exactly in the same way it can sniff a HTTP session id and
impersonate that HTTP session.
And, of course, the same solutions to this problem used to secure HTTP
applications can be used to secure CometD web applications, most notably the
use of TLS.

===== Customizing the handshake response message

The handshake response message can be customized, for example adding an object
to the `ext` field of the response, that specify further challenge data or the
code/reason of the failure, and what action should be done by the client (for
example, disconnecting or retrying the handshake).

This is an example of how the handshake response message can be customized in
the `SecurityPolicy` implementation:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MySecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (!canAuthenticate(session, message)) {
            // Retrieve the handshake response
            ServerMessage.Mutable handshakeReply = message.getAssociated();

            // Modify the advice, in this case tell to try again
            // If the advice is not modified it will default to disconnect the client
            Map advice = handshakeReply.getAdvice(true);
            advice.put(Message.RECONNECT_FIELD, Message.RECONNECT_HANDSHAKE_VALUE);

            // Modify the ext field with extra information on the authentication failure
            Map ext = handshakeReply.getExt(true);
            Map authentication = new HashMap();
            ext.put("com.myapp.authn", authentication);
            authentication.put("failureReason", "invalid_credentials");

            promise.succeed(false);
        }
        promise.succeed(true);
    }
}
----
====

Alternatively, it is possible to customize the handshake response message by
implementing a `BayeuxServer.Extension`:

====
[source,java]
----
public class HandshakeExtension implements BayeuxServer.Extension {
    public void void outgoing(ServerSession from, ServerSession to, ServerMessage.Mutable message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (Channel.META_HANDSHAKE.equals(message.getChannel())) {
            if (!message.isSuccessful()) {
                Map advice = message.getAdvice(true);
                advice.put(Message.RECONNECT_FIELD, Message.RECONNECT_HANDSHAKE_VALUE);

                Map ext = message.getExt(true);
                Map authentication = new HashMap();
                ext.put("com.myapp.authn", authentication);
                authentication.put("failureReason", "invalid_credentials");
            }
        }
        promise.succeed(true);
    }

    // Other methods omitted
}
----
====

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_authentication.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_authentication]]
==== Authentication

Authentication is a complex task, and can be achieved in many ways, and most
often each way is peculiar to a particular application.
That is why CometD does not provide an out of the box solution for authentication
but provides APIs that applications can use to implement in few steps their
own authentication mechanism.

The recommended way to perform authentication in CometD is to pass the
authentication credentials in the initial handshake message.

Both the xref:_javascript_handshake[JavaScript handshake API] and the
xref:_java_client_handshake[Java Client handshake API] allow an application to
pass an additional object that will be merged into the handshake message and
sent to the server:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/myapp/cometd'
});

// Register a listener to be notified of authentication success or failure
cometd.addListener('/meta/handshake', function(message) {
    var authn = message.ext && message.ext['com.myapp.authn'];
    if (authn && authn.failed === true) {
        // Authentication failed, tell the user
        window.alert('Authentication failed!');
    }
});

var username = 'foo';
var password = 'bar';

// Send the authentication information
cometd.handshake({
    ext: {
        com.myapp.authn: {
            user: username,
            credentials: password
        }
    }
});
----
====

The Bayeux Protocol specification suggests that the authentication information
is stored in the `ext` field of the handshake message (see
xref:_bayeux_security[here]) and it is good practice to use a fully qualified
name for the extension field, such as `com.myapp.authn`.

On the server, you need to configure the `BayeuxServer` object with an implementation
of `org.cometd.bayeux.server.SecurityPolicy` to deny the handshake to clients
that provide wrong credentials.

xref:_java_server_services_integration[The section on services integration] shows
how to perform the initialization and configuration of the `BayeuxServer` object,
and you can use similar code to configure the `SecurityPolicy` too, for example
below using a configuration servlet:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MyAppInitializer extends GenericServlet {
    @Override
    public void init() throws ServletException {
        BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)getServletContext().getAttribute(BayeuxServer.ATTRIBUTE);
        MyAppAuthenticator authenticator = new MyAppAuthenticator();
        bayeux.setSecurityPolicy(authenticator);
    }

    @Override
    public void service(ServletRequest req, ServletResponse res) throws ServletException, IOException {
        throw new ServletException();
    }
}
----
====

Below you can find the code for the `MyAppAuthenticator` class referenced above:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MyAppAuthenticator extends DefaultSecurityPolicy implements ServerSession.RemoveListener { <1>
    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) { <2>
        if (session.isLocalSession()) { <3>
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> ext = message.getExt();
        if (ext == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> authentication = (Map<String, Object>)ext.get("com.myapp.authn");
        if (authentication == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        Object authenticationData = verify(authentication); <4>
        if (authenticationData == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        // Authentication successful

        // Link authentication data to the session <5>

        // Be notified when the session disappears
        session.addListener(this); <6>

        promise.succeed(true);
    }

    public void removed(ServerSession session, boolean expired) { <7>
        // Unlink authentication data from the remote client <8>
    }
}
----
====
<1> Make `MyAppAuthenticator` be a `SecurityPolicy` and a `ServerSession.RemoveListener`,
since the code is really tied together.
<2> Override `SecurityPolicy.canHandshake()`, to extract the authentication
information from the message sent by the client.
<3> Allow handshakes for any server-side local session (such as those associated with
xref:_java_server_services[services]).
<4> Verify the authentication information sent by the client, and obtain back
server-side authentication data that you can later associate with the remote client.
<5> Link the server-side authentication data to the session.
<6> Register a listener to be notified when the remote session disappears
(which you will react to in step 8).
<7> Implement `RemoveListener.removed()`, which is called when the remote session
disappears, either because it disconnected or because it crashed.
<8> Unlink the server-side authentication data from the remote client object,
the operation opposite to step 5.

The most important steps are the number 5 and the number 8, where the
server-side authentication data is linked/unlinked to/from the
`org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerSession` object.

This linking depends very much from application to application.
It may link a database primary key (of the row representing the user account)
with the remote session id (obtained with session.getId()), and/or viceversa,
or it may link OAUTH tokens with the remote session id, etc.

The linking should be performed by some other object that can then be used by
other code of the application, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MyAppAuthenticator extends DefaultSecurityPolicy implements ServerSession.RemoveListener {
    private final Users users;

    public MyAppAuthenticator(Users users) {
        this.users = users;
    }

    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (session.isLocalSession()) {
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> ext = message.getExt();
        if (ext == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        Map<String, Object> authentication = (Map<String, Object>)ext.get("com.myapp.authn");
        if (authentication == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        if (!verify(authentication)) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        // Authentication successful.

        // Link authentication data to the session.
        users.put(session, authentication);

        // Be notified when the session disappears.
        session.addListener(this);

        promise.succeed(true);
    }

    public void removed(ServerSession session, boolean expired) {
        // Unlink authentication data from the remote client
        users.remove(session);
    }
}
----
====

And below you can find a very simple implementation of the `Users` class:

====
[source,java]
----
public class Users {
    private final ConcurrentMap<String, ServerSession> users = new ConcurrentHashMap<>();

    public void put(ServerSession session, Map<String, Object> credentials) {
        String user = (String)credentials.get("user");
        users.put(user, session);
    }

    public void remove(ServerSession session) {
        users.values().remove(session);
    }
}
----
====

The `Users` object can now be injected in xref:_java_server_services[CometD services]
and its API enriched to fit the application needs such as retrieving the user
name for a given session, or the `ServerSession` for a given user name, etc.

Alternatively, the linking/unlinking (steps 5 and 8 above) can be performed in a
`BayeuxServer.SessionListener`. These listeners are invoked _after_
`SecurityPolicy.canHandshake()` and are invoked also when a `ServerSession` is
removed, therefore there is no need to register a `RemoveListener` with the
`ServerSession` like done in step 6 above:

====
[source,java]
----
BayeuxServer bayeuxServer = ...;

final Users users = ...;

bayeuxServer.addListener(new BayeuxServer.SessionListener() {
    public void sessionAdded(ServerSession session, ServerMessage message) {
        Map<String, Object> authentication = (Map<String, Object>)ext.get("com.myapp.authn");
        users.put(session, authentication);
    }

    public void sessionRemoved(ServerSession session, boolean timedout) {
        users.remove(session);
    }
});
----
====

Each Bayeux message always come with a session id, which can be thought as
similar to the HTTP session id.
In the same way it is widespread practice to put the server-side authentication
data in the `HttpSession` object (identified by the HTTP session id), in CometD
web applications you can put server-side authentication data in the `ServerSession`
object.

The Bayeux session ids are long, randomly generated numbers, exactly like HTTP
session ids, and offer the same level security offered by a HTTP session id.
If an attacker manages to sniff a Bayeux session id, it can impersonate that
Bayeux session exactly in the same way it can sniff a HTTP session id and
impersonate that HTTP session.
And, of course, the same solutions to this problem used to secure HTTP
applications can be used to secure CometD web applications, most notably the
use of TLS.

===== Customizing the handshake response message

The handshake response message can be customized, for example adding an object
to the `ext` field of the response, that specify further challenge data or the
code/reason of the failure, and what action should be done by the client (for
example, disconnecting or retrying the handshake).

This is an example of how the handshake response message can be customized in
the `SecurityPolicy` implementation:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MySecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (!canAuthenticate(session, message)) {
            // Retrieve the handshake response
            ServerMessage.Mutable handshakeReply = message.getAssociated();

            // Modify the advice, in this case tell to try again
            // If the advice is not modified it will default to disconnect the client
            Map advice = handshakeReply.getAdvice(true);
            advice.put(Message.RECONNECT_FIELD, Message.RECONNECT_HANDSHAKE_VALUE);

            // Modify the ext field with extra information on the authentication failure
            Map ext = handshakeReply.getExt(true);
            Map authentication = new HashMap();
            ext.put("com.myapp.authn", authentication);
            authentication.put("failureReason", "invalid_credentials");

            promise.succeed(false);
        }
        promise.succeed(true);
    }
}
----
====

Alternatively, it is possible to customize the handshake response message by
implementing a `BayeuxServer.Extension`:

====
[source,java]
----
public class HandshakeExtension implements BayeuxServer.Extension {
    public void void outgoing(ServerSession from, ServerSession to, ServerMessage.Mutable message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (Channel.META_HANDSHAKE.equals(message.getChannel())) {
            if (!message.isSuccessful()) {
                Map advice = message.getAdvice(true);
                advice.put(Message.RECONNECT_FIELD, Message.RECONNECT_HANDSHAKE_VALUE);

                Map ext = message.getExt(true);
                Map authentication = new HashMap();
                ext.put("com.myapp.authn", authentication);
                authentication.put("failureReason", "invalid_credentials");
            }
        }
        promise.succeed(true);
    }

    // Other methods omitted
}
----
====
