cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_transports.adoc, before:


[[_javascript_transports]]
=== JavaScript Transports

<<_bayeux,The Bayeux protocol section>> defines two mandatory transports:
`long-polling` and `callback-polling`.

The JavaScript CometD implementation implements these two transports and
supports also the `websocket` transport (based on HTML 5
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSockets[WebSockets]).

[NOTE]
====
At the time of this writing, the IETF has finalized the WebSocket
protocol into https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc6455.txt[RFC 6455].
However, most of the browsers still implement earlier drafts of the
WebSocket protocol, so browser support varies (most notably, Microsoft's
Internet Explorer only supports WebSocket out of the box in version 10).
CometD falls back to `long-polling` if the `websocket` transport does not work.
====

==== The `long-polling` Transport

The `long-polling` transport is the default transport if the browser and the
server do not support WebSockets.
This transport is used when the communication with the Bayeux server happens
on the same domain, and also in the cross-domain mode for recent browsers,
such as Firefox 3.5+ (see also <<_javascript_transports_cross_origin,the cross origin section>>).
The data is sent to the server by means of a POST request with `Content-Type: application/json;charset=UTF-8`
via a plain XMLHttpRequest call.

==== The `callback-polling` Transport

The `callback-polling` transport is used when the communication with the
Bayeux server happens on a different domain and when the cross-domain mode
is not supported (see also <<_javascript_transports_cross_origin,the cross origin section>>).

The JavaScript `XMLHttpRequest` object used to have restrictions when the
invocation was directed to a domain different from the one to which the script
had been downloaded.

Recent browsers implement now a version of `XMLHttpRequest` object that supports
cross domain invocations, but for the invocation to succeed the server must
collaborate, typically by deploying a
<<_java_server_configuration_advanced,cross origin servlet filter>>.

In case of older browsers or servers that do not deploy a cross origin solution,
the `callback-polling` transport uses the JSONP script injection, which
injects a `<script>` element whose `src` attribute points to the Bayeux server.
The browser notices the script element injection and performs a GET request to the
specified source URL.
The Bayeux server is aware that this is a JSONP request and replies with a JavaScript
function that the browser then executes, (and calls back into the JavaScript CometD
implementation).

There are three main drawbacks in using this transport: 

* The transport is chattier.
  This is due to the fact that the browser executes the injected scripts sequentially,
  and until a script has been completely "downloaded", it cannot be executed.
  For example, imagine a communication that involves a script injection for the long poll,
  and a script injection for a message publish.
  The browser injects the long poll script, a request is made to the Bayeux server,
  but the Bayeux server holds the request waiting for server-side events (so the script
  is not downloaded). Then the browser injects the publish script, the request is made to
  the Bayeux server, which replies (so the script is downloaded). However, the browser
  does not execute the second script, because it has not executed the first yet (since its
  download is not finished). In these conditions, the publish is executed only after the
  long poll returns.
  To avoid this situation, the Bayeux server, in case of `callback-polling` transport,
  resumes the client's long poll for every message that arrives from that client, and
  that's why the transport is chattier: the long poll returns more often.
* The message size is limited.
  This is necessary to support IE7, which has a 2083 character limit for GET requests. 
* The reaction to failures is slower.This is due to the fact that if the script injection
  points to a URL that returns an error (for example, the Bayeux server is down), the
  browser silently ignores the error.

==== The `websocket` Transport

The `websocket` transport is available if the browser and the server support WebSocket.
The WebSocket protocol is designed to be the bidirectional communication protocol
for the web, so it is a natural fit in the CometD project.

The easiest way of enabling/disabling the `websocket` transport is to set a boolean
variable _before_ performing the initial CometD handshake:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var cometd = dojox.cometd; // Dojo style
var cometd = $.cometd; // jQuery style

// Disable the websocket transport
cometd.websocketEnabled = false;

// Initial handshake
cometd.init('http://localhost:8080/cometd');
----
====

An alternative way of disabling the `websocket` transport is to unregister its transport,
see also <<_javascript_transports_unregistering,the transport unregistering section>>.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Remember that enabling the `websocket` transport on the client is not enough: you must also enable it on the server.
Follow <<_java_server_transports,the server transports section>> for configuring `websocket` on the server.
====

[[_javascript_transports_unregistering]]
==== Unregistering Transports

CometD JavaScript transports are added in the JavaScript toolkit _bindings_
for the CometD JavaScript library.

The CometD JavaScript API allows you to unregister transports, and this can
be useful to force the use of only one transport (for example, for testing
purposes), or to disable certain transports that might be unreliable.
For example, it is possible to unregister the WebSocket transport by
unregistering it with the following code:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var cometd = dojox.cometd; // Dojo style
var cometd = $.cometd; // jQuery style

cometd.unregisterTransport('websocket');
----
====

[[_javascript_transports_cross_origin]]
==== The cross-origin Mode

Recent browsers introduced the capability for `XMLHttpRequest` calls to be performed
towards a different domain (see https://developer.mozilla.org/En/HTTP_access_control[HTTP Access Control]).
The JavaScript CometD implementation also supports this, with no configuration
necessary on the client (if the browser supports `XMLHttpRequest` cross-domain calls,
CometD uses them) and with a bit of configuration for the server, explained in
<<_java_server_configuration_advanced,this section>>.

To use the cross-domain mode, you need: 

* A cross-domain compliant browser.
* A compliant server (for example, Jetty configured with the `CrossOriginFilter`).

With this setup, even when the communication with the Bayeux server is cross-domain,
CometD uses the `long-polling` transport, avoiding the drawbacks of the `callback-polling`
transport.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_transports.adoc, after:


[[_javascript_transports]]
=== JavaScript Transports

xref:_bayeux[The Bayeux protocol section] defines two mandatory transports:
`long-polling` and `callback-polling`.

The JavaScript CometD implementation implements these two transports and
supports also the `websocket` transport (based on HTML 5
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSockets[WebSockets]).

[NOTE]
====
At the time of this writing, the IETF has finalized the WebSocket
protocol into https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc6455.txt[RFC 6455].
However, most of the browsers still implement earlier drafts of the
WebSocket protocol, so browser support varies (most notably, Microsoft's
Internet Explorer only supports WebSocket out of the box in version 10).
CometD falls back to `long-polling` if the `websocket` transport does not work.
====

==== The `long-polling` Transport

The `long-polling` transport is the default transport if the browser and the
server do not support WebSockets.
This transport is used when the communication with the Bayeux server happens
on the same domain, and also in the cross-domain mode for recent browsers,
such as Firefox 3.5+ (see also xref:_javascript_transports_cross_origin[the cross origin section]).
The data is sent to the server by means of a POST request with `Content-Type: application/json;charset=UTF-8`
via a plain XMLHttpRequest call.

==== The `callback-polling` Transport

The `callback-polling` transport is used when the communication with the
Bayeux server happens on a different domain and when the cross-domain mode
is not supported (see also xref:_javascript_transports_cross_origin[the cross origin section]).

The JavaScript `XMLHttpRequest` object used to have restrictions when the
invocation was directed to a domain different from the one to which the script
had been downloaded.

Recent browsers implement now a version of `XMLHttpRequest` object that supports
cross domain invocations, but for the invocation to succeed the server must
collaborate, typically by deploying a
xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced[cross origin servlet filter].

In case of older browsers or servers that do not deploy a cross origin solution,
the `callback-polling` transport uses the JSONP script injection, which
injects a `<script>` element whose `src` attribute points to the Bayeux server.
The browser notices the script element injection and performs a GET request to the
specified source URL.
The Bayeux server is aware that this is a JSONP request and replies with a JavaScript
function that the browser then executes, (and calls back into the JavaScript CometD
implementation).

There are three main drawbacks in using this transport: 

* The transport is chattier.
  This is due to the fact that the browser executes the injected scripts sequentially,
  and until a script has been completely "downloaded", it cannot be executed.
  For example, imagine a communication that involves a script injection for the long poll,
  and a script injection for a message publish.
  The browser injects the long poll script, a request is made to the Bayeux server,
  but the Bayeux server holds the request waiting for server-side events (so the script
  is not downloaded). Then the browser injects the publish script, the request is made to
  the Bayeux server, which replies (so the script is downloaded). However, the browser
  does not execute the second script, because it has not executed the first yet (since its
  download is not finished). In these conditions, the publish is executed only after the
  long poll returns.
  To avoid this situation, the Bayeux server, in case of `callback-polling` transport,
  resumes the client's long poll for every message that arrives from that client, and
  that's why the transport is chattier: the long poll returns more often.
* The message size is limited.
  This is necessary to support IE7, which has a 2083 character limit for GET requests. 
* The reaction to failures is slower.This is due to the fact that if the script injection
  points to a URL that returns an error (for example, the Bayeux server is down), the
  browser silently ignores the error.

==== The `websocket` Transport

The `websocket` transport is available if the browser and the server support WebSocket.
The WebSocket protocol is designed to be the bidirectional communication protocol
for the web, so it is a natural fit in the CometD project.

The easiest way of enabling/disabling the `websocket` transport is to set a boolean
variable _before_ performing the initial CometD handshake:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var cometd = dojox.cometd; // Dojo style
var cometd = $.cometd; // jQuery style

// Disable the websocket transport
cometd.websocketEnabled = false;

// Initial handshake
cometd.init('http://localhost:8080/cometd');
----
====

An alternative way of disabling the `websocket` transport is to unregister its transport,
see also xref:_javascript_transports_unregistering[the transport unregistering section].

[IMPORTANT]
====
Remember that enabling the `websocket` transport on the client is not enough: you must also enable it on the server.
Follow xref:_java_server_transports[the server transports section] for configuring `websocket` on the server.
====

[[_javascript_transports_unregistering]]
==== Unregistering Transports

CometD JavaScript transports are added in the JavaScript toolkit _bindings_
for the CometD JavaScript library.

The CometD JavaScript API allows you to unregister transports, and this can
be useful to force the use of only one transport (for example, for testing
purposes), or to disable certain transports that might be unreliable.
For example, it is possible to unregister the WebSocket transport by
unregistering it with the following code:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var cometd = dojox.cometd; // Dojo style
var cometd = $.cometd; // jQuery style

cometd.unregisterTransport('websocket');
----
====

[[_javascript_transports_cross_origin]]
==== The cross-origin Mode

Recent browsers introduced the capability for `XMLHttpRequest` calls to be performed
towards a different domain (see https://developer.mozilla.org/En/HTTP_access_control[HTTP Access Control]).
The JavaScript CometD implementation also supports this, with no configuration
necessary on the client (if the browser supports `XMLHttpRequest` cross-domain calls,
CometD uses them) and with a bit of configuration for the server, explained in
xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced[this section].

To use the cross-domain mode, you need: 

* A cross-domain compliant browser.
* A compliant server (for example, Jetty configured with the `CrossOriginFilter`).

With this setup, even when the communication with the Bayeux server is cross-domain,
CometD uses the `long-polling` transport, avoiding the drawbacks of the `callback-polling`
transport.
