cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_oort_objects.adoc, before:


[[_java_oort_objects]]
=== Distributed Objects and Services

The <<_java_oort,Oort section>> described how it is possible to link nodes to
form an Oort cluster.
Oort nodes are all connected to each other so that they are aware of all the
other peer nodes.
Additionally, each node can forward messages that have been published to
broadcast channels (see also <<_concepts_channels,this section>>) to other nodes.

Your application may need to maintain information, on each node, that is
distributed across all nodes.
A typical example is the total number of users connected to all nodes.
Each node can easily know how many users are connected to itself, but in this
case you want to know the total number of all users connected to all nodes (for
example to display the number in a user interface). The information that you
want to distribute is the "data entity" – in this case the number of users
connected to each node – and this feature is named "data distribution". Having
each node distributing its own data entity allows each node to know the data
entity of the other nodes, and compute the total number of users.

Furthermore, your application may need to perform certain actions on a specific node.
For example, your application may need to access a database system that is
only accessible from a specific node for security reasons.
This feature is named "service forwarding".

Oort and Seti (see also <<_java_oort_seti,the java oort seti section>>) alone
do not offer data distribution or service forwarding out of the box, but it
is possible to build on Oort features to implement them, and this is exactly
what CometD offers, respectively, with <<_java_oort_objects_oort_object,`OortObject`>>
and <<_java_oort_objects_oort_service,`OortService`>>.

include::java_oort_object.adoc[]
include::java_oort_service.adoc[]

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_oort_objects.adoc, after:


[[_java_oort_objects]]
=== Distributed Objects and Services

The xref:_java_oort[Oort section] described how it is possible to link nodes to
form an Oort cluster.
Oort nodes are all connected to each other so that they are aware of all the
other peer nodes.
Additionally, each node can forward messages that have been published to
broadcast channels (see also xref:_concepts_channels[this section]) to other nodes.

Your application may need to maintain information, on each node, that is
distributed across all nodes.
A typical example is the total number of users connected to all nodes.
Each node can easily know how many users are connected to itself, but in this
case you want to know the total number of all users connected to all nodes (for
example to display the number in a user interface). The information that you
want to distribute is the "data entity" – in this case the number of users
connected to each node – and this feature is named "data distribution". Having
each node distributing its own data entity allows each node to know the data
entity of the other nodes, and compute the total number of users.

Furthermore, your application may need to perform certain actions on a specific node.
For example, your application may need to access a database system that is
only accessible from a specific node for security reasons.
This feature is named "service forwarding".

Oort and Seti (see also xref:_java_oort_seti[the java oort seti section]) alone
do not offer data distribution or service forwarding out of the box, but it
is possible to build on Oort features to implement them, and this is exactly
what CometD offers, respectively, with xref:_java_oort_objects_oort_object[`OortObject`]
and xref:_java_oort_objects_oort_service[`OortService`].

include::java_oort_object.adoc[]
include::java_oort_service.adoc[]
