cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_client_send.adoc, before:


[[_java_client_send]]
==== Sending Messages

CometD allows you to send messages in two ways:

. by <<_java_client_publish,publishing>> a message onto a channel
. by performing a <<_java_client_rpc,remote procedure call>>

The first case is covered by the `ClientSessionChannel.publish(...)` API.
The second case is covered by the `ClientSession.remoteCall()` API.

[[_java_client_publish]]
===== Publishing

The following is a typical example of publishing a message on a channel:

====
[source,java]
----
ClientTransport transport = ...
ClientSession client = new BayeuxClient("http://localhost:8080/cometd", transport);
client.handshake();

Map<String, Object> data = new HashMap<String, Object>();
// Fill in the data

ClientSessionChannel channel = client.getChannel("/game/table/1");
channel.publish(data);
----
====

Publishing data on a channel is an asynchronous operation.

When the message you published arrives to the server, the server replies to
the client with a publish acknowledgment; this allows clients to be sure that
the message reached the server.
The publish acknowledgment arrives on the same channel the message was published
to, with the same message `id`, with a `successful` field.
If the message publish fails for any reason, for example because server cannot
be reached, then a publish failure will be emitted, similarly to publish acknowledgments.

In order to be notified of publish acknowledgments or failures, you can use
this variant of the `publish()` method:

====
[source,java]
----
Map<String, Object> data = new HashMap<String, Object>();
// Fill in the data

client.getChannel("/game/table/1").publish(data, message -> {
    if (message.isSuccessful()) {
        // The message reached the server
    }
});
----
====

[NOTE]
====
Calling `publish()` _does not_ mean that you have published the message when `publish()` returns.
====

Message batching is also available:

====
[source,java]
----
final ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

client.batch (() -> {
    Map<String, Object> data1 = new HashMap<String, Object>();
    // Fill in the data1 map object
    client.getChannel("/game/table/1").publish(data1);

    Map<String, Object> data2 = new HashMap<String, Object>();
    // Fill in the data2 map object<
    client.getChannel("/game/chat/1").publish(data2);
});
----
====

[WARNING]
====
The `ClientSession` API also allows you to batch using `startBatch()` and
`endBatch()`, but remember to call `endBatch()` after having called `startBatch()`,
for example in a `finally` block.
If you don't, your messages continue to queue up, and your application
does not work as expected.
====

[[_java_client_send_binary]]
===== Publishing Binary Data

You can send binary data such as a `byte[]` or a `ByteBuffer` by using the
`org.cometd.bayeux.BinaryData` class.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled as specified
in <<_extensions_binary,the binary extension section>>.

====
[source,java]
----
ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

byte[] bytes = ...;
client.getChannel("/channel").publish(new BinaryData(bytes, true, null));
----
====

As explained in the <<_concepts_binary_data,concepts section>>, CometD takes care
of converting the `BinaryData` object into the right format and adds the binary
extension to the message.

[[_java_client_rpc]]
===== Remote Calls

Remote calls are used when the client only wants to call the server to
perform some action, rather than sending a message to other clients.

The typical usage is the following:

====
[source,java]
----
ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

...
Object data = ...;
client.remoteCall("target", data, message -> {
    if (message.isSuccessful()) {
        String result = (String)message.getData();
        // Use the result.
    } else {
        // Remote call failed.
    }
}
----
====

The first argument of `remoteCall()` is the _target_ of the remote call.
You can think of it as a method name to invoke on the server, or you can think
of it as the action you want to perform.
It may or may not have a leading `/` character, and may be composed of multiple
segments such as `target/subtarget`.
It must match a server-side service annotated with `@RemoteCall` as explained
<<_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_remote_call,in this section>>.

The second argument of `remoteCall()` is an object with the arguments of the
remote call.
You can think of it as the arguments of the remote method call, reified as
an object, or you can think of it as the data needed to perform the action.

The third argument of `remoteCall()` is the callback invoked when the remote
call returns, or when it fails (for example due to network failures), with
the response message.
Data returned by the server via `RemoteCall.Caller.result()` or
`RemoteCall.Caller.failure()` will be available in the response message.

[[_java_client_rpc_binary]]
===== Remote Calls with Binary Data

Similarly to publishing messages with binary data, it is possible to perform
remote calls with binary data.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled in the client as specified
in <<_extensions_binary,the binary extension section>>.

Here is an example that sends a `ByteBuffer`:

====
[source,java]
----
ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

ByteBuffer buffer = ...;
client.remoteCall("target", new BinaryData(buffer, true, null), message -> {
    if (message.isSuccessful()) {
        // Use the result.
    } else {
        // Remote call failed.
    }
}
----
====

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_client_send.adoc, after:


[[_java_client_send]]
==== Sending Messages

CometD allows you to send messages in two ways:

. by xref:_java_client_publish[publishing] a message onto a channel
. by performing a xref:_java_client_rpc[remote procedure call]

The first case is covered by the `ClientSessionChannel.publish(...)` API.
The second case is covered by the `ClientSession.remoteCall()` API.

[[_java_client_publish]]
===== Publishing

The following is a typical example of publishing a message on a channel:

====
[source,java]
----
ClientTransport transport = ...
ClientSession client = new BayeuxClient("http://localhost:8080/cometd", transport);
client.handshake();

Map<String, Object> data = new HashMap<String, Object>();
// Fill in the data

ClientSessionChannel channel = client.getChannel("/game/table/1");
channel.publish(data);
----
====

Publishing data on a channel is an asynchronous operation.

When the message you published arrives to the server, the server replies to
the client with a publish acknowledgment; this allows clients to be sure that
the message reached the server.
The publish acknowledgment arrives on the same channel the message was published
to, with the same message `id`, with a `successful` field.
If the message publish fails for any reason, for example because server cannot
be reached, then a publish failure will be emitted, similarly to publish acknowledgments.

In order to be notified of publish acknowledgments or failures, you can use
this variant of the `publish()` method:

====
[source,java]
----
Map<String, Object> data = new HashMap<String, Object>();
// Fill in the data

client.getChannel("/game/table/1").publish(data, message -> {
    if (message.isSuccessful()) {
        // The message reached the server
    }
});
----
====

[NOTE]
====
Calling `publish()` _does not_ mean that you have published the message when `publish()` returns.
====

Message batching is also available:

====
[source,java]
----
final ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

client.batch (() -> {
    Map<String, Object> data1 = new HashMap<String, Object>();
    // Fill in the data1 map object
    client.getChannel("/game/table/1").publish(data1);

    Map<String, Object> data2 = new HashMap<String, Object>();
    // Fill in the data2 map object<
    client.getChannel("/game/chat/1").publish(data2);
});
----
====

[WARNING]
====
The `ClientSession` API also allows you to batch using `startBatch()` and
`endBatch()`, but remember to call `endBatch()` after having called `startBatch()`,
for example in a `finally` block.
If you don't, your messages continue to queue up, and your application
does not work as expected.
====

[[_java_client_send_binary]]
===== Publishing Binary Data

You can send binary data such as a `byte[]` or a `ByteBuffer` by using the
`org.cometd.bayeux.BinaryData` class.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled as specified
in xref:_extensions_binary[the binary extension section].

====
[source,java]
----
ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

byte[] bytes = ...;
client.getChannel("/channel").publish(new BinaryData(bytes, true, null));
----
====

As explained in the xref:_concepts_binary_data[concepts section], CometD takes care
of converting the `BinaryData` object into the right format and adds the binary
extension to the message.

[[_java_client_rpc]]
===== Remote Calls

Remote calls are used when the client only wants to call the server to
perform some action, rather than sending a message to other clients.

The typical usage is the following:

====
[source,java]
----
ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

...
Object data = ...;
client.remoteCall("target", data, message -> {
    if (message.isSuccessful()) {
        String result = (String)message.getData();
        // Use the result.
    } else {
        // Remote call failed.
    }
}
----
====

The first argument of `remoteCall()` is the _target_ of the remote call.
You can think of it as a method name to invoke on the server, or you can think
of it as the action you want to perform.
It may or may not have a leading `/` character, and may be composed of multiple
segments such as `target/subtarget`.
It must match a server-side service annotated with `@RemoteCall` as explained
xref:_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_remote_call[in this section].

The second argument of `remoteCall()` is an object with the arguments of the
remote call.
You can think of it as the arguments of the remote method call, reified as
an object, or you can think of it as the data needed to perform the action.

The third argument of `remoteCall()` is the callback invoked when the remote
call returns, or when it fails (for example due to network failures), with
the response message.
Data returned by the server via `RemoteCall.Caller.result()` or
`RemoteCall.Caller.failure()` will be available in the response message.

[[_java_client_rpc_binary]]
===== Remote Calls with Binary Data

Similarly to publishing messages with binary data, it is possible to perform
remote calls with binary data.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled in the client as specified
in xref:_extensions_binary[the binary extension section].

Here is an example that sends a `ByteBuffer`:

====
[source,java]
----
ClientSession client = ...;
client.handshake();

ByteBuffer buffer = ...;
client.remoteCall("target", new BinaryData(buffer, true, null), message -> {
    if (message.isSuccessful()) {
        // Use the result.
    } else {
        // Remote call failed.
    }
}
----
====
