cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_oort_seti.adoc, before:


[[_java_oort_seti]]
=== Seti

`Seti` is the Oort clustering component that tracks clients connected to any
node in the cluster, and allows an application to send messages to particular
client(s) in the cluster transparently, as if they were in the local node.

==== Configuring Seti

Keep the following points in mind when configuring Seti:

* You must configure an `org.cometd.oort.Seti` instance with an associated
  `org.cometd.oort.Oort` instance, either via code or by configuring an
  `org.cometd.oort.SetiServlet` in `web.xml`.
* There may be only one instance of `Seti` for each `Oort`.
* The `load-on-startup` parameter of the `SetiServlet` must be greater than
  that of the Oort configuration Servlet.
* `SetiServlet` does not have any configuration init parameter.

A configuration example follows:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>oort</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.oort.OortStaticConfigServlet</servlet-class>
        <init-param>
            <param-name>oort.url</param-name>
            <param-value>http://host:port/context/cometd</param-value>
        </init-param>
        <load-on-startup>2</load-on-startup>
    </servlet>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>seti</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.oort.SetiServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>3</load-on-startup>
    </servlet>
</web-app>
----
====

==== Associating and Disassociating Users

`Seti` allows you to associate a unique string representation of a user with
one or more `ServerSessions` (see also <<_concepts,the concepts section>> for
more details on `ServerSession`).

This normally occurs when the user first logs in to the application, and the
unique string representation of the user can be anything that the user provides
to authenticate itself (a user name, a token, a database ID). For brevity, this
unique string representation of the user is called `userId`.
The same `userId` may log in multiple times (for example from a desktop computer
and from a mobile device), so it is associated to multiple `ServerSessions`.

In practice, the best way to associate a `userId` with a `ServerSession` is in a
`SecurityPolicy` during <<_java_server_authentication,authentication>>, for example:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MySecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    private final Seti seti;

    public MySecurityPolicy(Seti seti) {
        this.seti = seti;
    }

    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (session.isLocalSession()) {
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        // Authenticate
        String userId = performAuthentication(session, message);
        if (userId == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        // Associate
        seti.associate(userId, session);

        promise.succeed(true);
    }
}
----
====

Alternatively, you can perform the association in a `BayeuxServer.Extension`
or in a CometD service (see also <<_java_server_services,the services section>>),
in response to a specific message that the client always sends after a
successful handshake.

When a `Seti` instance first associates a `userId` with a session, it broadcasts
a _presence_ message on the cluster (on channel `/seti/all`, (see also
<<_java_oort_seti_listeners,the Seti listeners section>>) that tells all the
other nodes where this `userId` is located.

In this way, all the nodes in the cluster know where a particular `userId` resides.
Further associations of the same `userId` (with different sessions) on the same `Seti`
do not broadcast any presence message, because other `Setis` already know that
that particular `userId` resides in that `Seti`.
The same `userId` can be associated in different nodes (for example, the desktop
computer logs in – and therefore is associated – in `comet1`, while the mobile
device is associated in `comet2`).

Similarly, you can disassociate a `userId` at any time by calling
`Seti.disassociate(userId, session)`.
If the user disconnects or "disappears" (for example, it crashed or its network
dropped), the server removes or expires its session and `Seti` automatically
disassociates the `userId`.
When the last disassociation of a particular `userId` occurs on a `Seti`
instance, `Seti` broadcasts a presence message on the cluster (on channel
`/seti/all`) that tells all the other nodes that `userId` is no longer present
on that `Seti` (although the same `userId` might still be associated in other
`Setis`).

[[_java_oort_seti_listeners]]
==== Listening for Presence Messages

Applications can register presence listeners that are notified when a presence
message arrives at a `Seti` instance:

====
[source,java]
----
Seti seti = ...;
seti.addPresenceListener(new Seti.PresenceListener() {
    public void presenceAdded(Event event) {
        System.out.printf("User ID %s is now present in node %s%n", event.getUserId(), event.getURL());
    }

    public void presenceRemoved(Event event) {
        System.out.printf("User ID %s is now absent in node %s%n", event.getUserId(), event.getURL());
    }
});
----
====

The URL `event.getURL()` returns is the URL of an Oort node; you can use it
to retrieve the `OortComet` instance connected to that node, for example to
publish messages (or to subscribe to additional channels):

====
[source,java]
----
final Seti seti = ...;
seti.addPresenceListener(new Seti.PresenceListener() {
    public void presenceAdded(Event event) {
        Oort oort = seti.getOort();
        String oortURL = event.getURL();
        OortComet oortComet = oort.getComet(oortURL);

        Map<String, Object> data = new HashMap<String, Object>
        data.put("action", "sync_request");
        data.put("userId", event.getUserId());

        oortComet.getChannel("/service/sync").publish(data);
    }

    public void presenceRemoved(Event event) {
    }
});
----
====

==== Sending Messages

After users have been associated, `Seti.sendMessage(String userId, String channel, Object data)`
can send messages to a particular user in the cluster.

====
[source,java]
----
@Service("seti_forwarder");
public class SetiForwarder {
    @Inject
    private Seti seti;

    @Listener("/service/forward")
    public void forward(ServerSession session, ServerMessage message) {
        Map<String,Object> data = message.getDataAsMap();
        String targetUserId = (String)data.get("targetUserId");
        seti.sendMessage(targetUserId, message.getChannel(), data);
    }
}
----
====

In the example below, `clientA` wants to send a message to `clientC`
but not to `clientB`.
Therefore `clientA` sends a message to the server it is connected to using a
service channel so that the message is not broadcast, and then a specialized
service (see also <<_java_server_services,the services section>>) routes the
message to the appropriate user using `Seti` (see code snippet above).
The `Seti` on `nodeA` knows that the target user is on `nodeC`
(thanks to the association) and forwards the message to `nodeC`, which in
turn delivers the message to `clientC`.

image::seti_chat.png[]

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_oort_seti.adoc, after:


[[_java_oort_seti]]
=== Seti

`Seti` is the Oort clustering component that tracks clients connected to any
node in the cluster, and allows an application to send messages to particular
client(s) in the cluster transparently, as if they were in the local node.

==== Configuring Seti

Keep the following points in mind when configuring Seti:

* You must configure an `org.cometd.oort.Seti` instance with an associated
  `org.cometd.oort.Oort` instance, either via code or by configuring an
  `org.cometd.oort.SetiServlet` in `web.xml`.
* There may be only one instance of `Seti` for each `Oort`.
* The `load-on-startup` parameter of the `SetiServlet` must be greater than
  that of the Oort configuration Servlet.
* `SetiServlet` does not have any configuration init parameter.

A configuration example follows:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>oort</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.oort.OortStaticConfigServlet</servlet-class>
        <init-param>
            <param-name>oort.url</param-name>
            <param-value>http://host:port/context/cometd</param-value>
        </init-param>
        <load-on-startup>2</load-on-startup>
    </servlet>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>seti</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.oort.SetiServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>3</load-on-startup>
    </servlet>
</web-app>
----
====

==== Associating and Disassociating Users

`Seti` allows you to associate a unique string representation of a user with
one or more `ServerSessions` (see also xref:_concepts[the concepts section] for
more details on `ServerSession`).

This normally occurs when the user first logs in to the application, and the
unique string representation of the user can be anything that the user provides
to authenticate itself (a user name, a token, a database ID). For brevity, this
unique string representation of the user is called `userId`.
The same `userId` may log in multiple times (for example from a desktop computer
and from a mobile device), so it is associated to multiple `ServerSessions`.

In practice, the best way to associate a `userId` with a `ServerSession` is in a
`SecurityPolicy` during xref:_java_server_authentication[authentication], for example:

====
[source,java]
----
public class MySecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    private final Seti seti;

    public MySecurityPolicy(Seti seti) {
        this.seti = seti;
    }

    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer server, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        if (session.isLocalSession()) {
            promise.succeed(true);
            return;
        }

        // Authenticate
        String userId = performAuthentication(session, message);
        if (userId == null) {
            promise.succeed(false);
            return;
        }

        // Associate
        seti.associate(userId, session);

        promise.succeed(true);
    }
}
----
====

Alternatively, you can perform the association in a `BayeuxServer.Extension`
or in a CometD service (see also xref:_java_server_services[the services section]),
in response to a specific message that the client always sends after a
successful handshake.

When a `Seti` instance first associates a `userId` with a session, it broadcasts
a _presence_ message on the cluster (on channel `/seti/all`, (see also
xref:_java_oort_seti_listeners[the Seti listeners section]) that tells all the
other nodes where this `userId` is located.

In this way, all the nodes in the cluster know where a particular `userId` resides.
Further associations of the same `userId` (with different sessions) on the same `Seti`
do not broadcast any presence message, because other `Setis` already know that
that particular `userId` resides in that `Seti`.
The same `userId` can be associated in different nodes (for example, the desktop
computer logs in – and therefore is associated – in `comet1`, while the mobile
device is associated in `comet2`).

Similarly, you can disassociate a `userId` at any time by calling
`Seti.disassociate(userId, session)`.
If the user disconnects or "disappears" (for example, it crashed or its network
dropped), the server removes or expires its session and `Seti` automatically
disassociates the `userId`.
When the last disassociation of a particular `userId` occurs on a `Seti`
instance, `Seti` broadcasts a presence message on the cluster (on channel
`/seti/all`) that tells all the other nodes that `userId` is no longer present
on that `Seti` (although the same `userId` might still be associated in other
`Setis`).

[[_java_oort_seti_listeners]]
==== Listening for Presence Messages

Applications can register presence listeners that are notified when a presence
message arrives at a `Seti` instance:

====
[source,java]
----
Seti seti = ...;
seti.addPresenceListener(new Seti.PresenceListener() {
    public void presenceAdded(Event event) {
        System.out.printf("User ID %s is now present in node %s%n", event.getUserId(), event.getURL());
    }

    public void presenceRemoved(Event event) {
        System.out.printf("User ID %s is now absent in node %s%n", event.getUserId(), event.getURL());
    }
});
----
====

The URL `event.getURL()` returns is the URL of an Oort node; you can use it
to retrieve the `OortComet` instance connected to that node, for example to
publish messages (or to subscribe to additional channels):

====
[source,java]
----
final Seti seti = ...;
seti.addPresenceListener(new Seti.PresenceListener() {
    public void presenceAdded(Event event) {
        Oort oort = seti.getOort();
        String oortURL = event.getURL();
        OortComet oortComet = oort.getComet(oortURL);

        Map<String, Object> data = new HashMap<String, Object>
        data.put("action", "sync_request");
        data.put("userId", event.getUserId());

        oortComet.getChannel("/service/sync").publish(data);
    }

    public void presenceRemoved(Event event) {
    }
});
----
====

==== Sending Messages

After users have been associated, `Seti.sendMessage(String userId, String channel, Object data)`
can send messages to a particular user in the cluster.

====
[source,java]
----
@Service("seti_forwarder");
public class SetiForwarder {
    @Inject
    private Seti seti;

    @Listener("/service/forward")
    public void forward(ServerSession session, ServerMessage message) {
        Map<String,Object> data = message.getDataAsMap();
        String targetUserId = (String)data.get("targetUserId");
        seti.sendMessage(targetUserId, message.getChannel(), data);
    }
}
----
====

In the example below, `clientA` wants to send a message to `clientC`
but not to `clientB`.
Therefore `clientA` sends a message to the server it is connected to using a
service channel so that the message is not broadcast, and then a specialized
service (see also xref:_java_server_services[the services section]) routes the
message to the appropriate user using `Seti` (see code snippet above).
The `Seti` on `nodeA` knows that the target user is on `nodeC`
(thanks to the association) and forwards the message to `nodeC`, which in
turn delivers the message to `clientC`.

image::seti_chat.png[]
