cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_configure.adoc, before:


[[_javascript_configure]]
=== Configuring and Initializing

After you set up your skeleton project following <<_primer,the primer>>, you
probably want to fully understand how to customize and configure the parameters
that govern the behavior of the CometD implementation.

The complete API is available through a single object prototype named `org.cometd.CometD`.
The Dojo toolkit has one instance of this object available under the name
`dojox.cometd`, while for jQuery it is available under the name `$.cometd`.
This default `cometd` object has been instantiated and configured with the
default values and it has not yet started any Bayeux communication.

Before the `cometd` object can start Bayeux communication it needs a mandatory
parameter: the URL of the Bayeux server.
The URL of the server must be absolute (and therefore include the scheme, host,
optionally the port and the path of the server). The scheme of the URL must
always be either "http" or "https". The CometD JavaScript implementation will
transparently take care of converting the scheme to "ws" or "wss" in case of
usage of the WebSocket protocol.

One `cometd` object connects to one Bayeux server.
If you need to connect to multiple Bayeux servers, see
<<_javascript_configure_multiple_objects,this section>>.

There are two ways of passing the URL parameter:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// First style: URL string
cometd.configure('http://localhost:8080/cometd');

// Second style: configuration object
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});
----
====

The first way is a shorthand for the second way.
However, the second way allows you to pass other configuration parameters, currently:

[cols="^3,^1,^2,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name | Required | Default Value | Parameter Description

| url
| yes
|
| The URL of the Bayeux server this client will connect to.

| logLevel
| no
| info
| The log level. Possible values are: "warn", "info", "debug". Output to window.console if available.

| maxConnections
| no
| 2
| The maximum number of connections used to connect to the Bayeux server.
  Change this value only if you know exactly the client's connection limit
  and what "request queued behind long poll" means.

| backoffIncrement
| no
| 1000
| The number of milliseconds that the backoff time increments every time a
  connection with the Bayeux server fails. CometD attempts to reconnect after
  the backoff time elapses.

| maxBackoff
| no
| 60000
| The maximum number of milliseconds of the backoff time after which the
  backoff time is not incremented further.

| maxNetworkDelay
| no
| 10000
| The maximum number of milliseconds to wait before considering a request to the Bayeux server failed.

| requestHeaders
| no
| {}
| An object containing the request headers to be sent for every
  Bayeux request (for example, {"My-Custom-Header":"MyValue"}).

| appendMessageTypeToURL
| no
| true
| Determines whether or not the Bayeux message type (handshake, connect, disconnect)
  is appended to the URL of the Bayeux server (see above).

| autoBatch
| no
| false
| Determines whether multiple publishes that get queued are sent as a batch
  on the first occasion, without requiring explicit batching.

| connectTimeout
| no
| 0
| The maximum number of milliseconds to wait for a WebSocket connection to be opened.
  It does not apply to HTTP connections. A timeout value of 0 means to wait forever.

| stickyReconnect
| no
| true
| Only applies to the `websocket` transport. Determines whether to stick
  using the `websocket` transport when a `websocket` transport failure has
  been detected after the `websocket` transport was able to successfully
  connect to the server.

| maxURILength
| no
| 2000
| The max length of the URI for a request made with the `callback-polling`
  transport. Microsoft Internet Explorer 7 and 8 are known to limit the URI
  length, so single large messages sent by CometD may fail to remain within
  the max URI length when encoded in JSON.
|===

After you have configured the `cometd` object, the Bayeux communication does
not start until you call `handshake()` (see also <<_javascript_handshake,the javascript handshake section>>).

Previous users of the JavaScript CometD implementation called a function named `init()`.
This function still exists, and it is a shorthand for calling `configure()` followed by `handshake()`.
Follow the advice in <<_javascript_handshake,the handshake section>> as it applies as well to `init()`.

[[_javascript_configure_multiple_objects]]
==== Configuring and Initializing Multiple Objects

Sometimes there is the need to connect to multiple Bayeux servers.
The default `cometd` object available as `dojox.cometd` or `$.cometd`
can only be configured to connect to one server.

However, it is easy to create other `cometd` objects.
In Dojo, there is a `dojox.CometD` (note the capital 'C' and 'D' of `CometD`)
constructor function that can be used to create new `cometd` objects.
In jQuery, there is an equivalent `$.CometD` constructor function.
It can be used in this way:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Dojo style
var cometd1 = dojox.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new dojox.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// jQuery style
var cometd1 = $.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new $.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// Configure and handshake
cometd1.init('http://host1:8080/cometd');
cometd2.init('http://host2:9090/cometd');
----
====

Note how the two `cometd` objects are initialized with different URLs.

==== Configuring Extensions in Multiple Objects

Configuring extensions in the default `cometd` object is covered in
<<_extensions,the extensions section>>.
To configure extensions for the additional `cometd` objects must be
done manually in the following way:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Dojo style
var cometd1 = dojox.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new dojox.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// jQuery style
var cometd1 = $.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new $.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// Configure extensions for the second object
cometd2.registerExtension('ack', new org.cometd.AckExtension());
cometd2.registerExtension('timestamp', new org.cometd.TimeStampExtension());
cometd2.registerExtension('timesync', new org.cometd.TimeSyncExtension());
cometd2.registerExtension('reload', new org.cometd.ReloadExtension());
----
====

You should not configure the extensions for the default `cometd` object in
this way, but instead follow <<_extensions,the extensions section>>.

You should configure extension manually like shown above only for additional
`cometd` objects.
You can configure zero, one, or all the extensions for the additional `cometd`
objects, depending on your application needs.

Commit message:

Issue #699 - Client session lost when browser minimized / background tab.
Documented new configuration option "useWorkerScheduler".

Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_configure.adoc, after:


[[_javascript_configure]]
=== Configuring and Initializing

After you set up your skeleton project following <<_primer,the primer>>, you
probably want to fully understand how to customize and configure the parameters
that govern the behavior of the CometD implementation.

The complete API is available through a single object prototype named `org.cometd.CometD`.
The Dojo toolkit has one instance of this object available under the name
`dojox.cometd`, while for jQuery it is available under the name `$.cometd`.
This default `cometd` object has been instantiated and configured with the
default values and it has not yet started any Bayeux communication.

Before the `cometd` object can start Bayeux communication it needs a mandatory
parameter: the URL of the Bayeux server.
The URL of the server must be absolute (and therefore include the scheme, host,
optionally the port and the path of the server). The scheme of the URL must
always be either "http" or "https". The CometD JavaScript implementation will
transparently take care of converting the scheme to "ws" or "wss" in case of
usage of the WebSocket protocol.

One `cometd` object connects to one Bayeux server.
If you need to connect to multiple Bayeux servers, see
<<_javascript_configure_multiple_objects,this section>>.

There are two ways of passing the URL parameter:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// First style: URL string
cometd.configure('http://localhost:8080/cometd');

// Second style: configuration object
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});
----
====

The first way is a shorthand for the second way.
However, the second way allows you to pass other configuration parameters, currently:

[cols="^3,^1,^2,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name | Required | Default Value | Parameter Description

| url
| yes
|
| The URL of the Bayeux server this client will connect to.

| logLevel
| no
| info
| The log level. Possible values are: "warn", "info", "debug". Output to window.console if available.

| maxConnections
| no
| 2
| The maximum number of connections used to connect to the Bayeux server.
  Change this value only if you know exactly the client's connection limit
  and what "request queued behind long poll" means.

| backoffIncrement
| no
| 1000
| The number of milliseconds that the backoff time increments every time a
  connection with the Bayeux server fails. CometD attempts to reconnect after
  the backoff time elapses.

| maxBackoff
| no
| 60000
| The maximum number of milliseconds of the backoff time after which the
  backoff time is not incremented further.

| maxNetworkDelay
| no
| 10000
| The maximum number of milliseconds to wait before considering a request to the Bayeux server failed.

| requestHeaders
| no
| {}
| An object containing the request headers to be sent for every
  Bayeux request (for example, {"My-Custom-Header":"MyValue"}).

| appendMessageTypeToURL
| no
| true
| Determines whether or not the Bayeux message type (handshake, connect, disconnect)
  is appended to the URL of the Bayeux server (see above).

| autoBatch
| no
| false
| Determines whether multiple publishes that get queued are sent as a batch
  on the first occasion, without requiring explicit batching.

| connectTimeout
| no
| 0
| The maximum number of milliseconds to wait for a WebSocket connection to be opened.
  It does not apply to HTTP connections. A timeout value of 0 means to wait forever.

| stickyReconnect
| no
| true
| Only applies to the `websocket` transport. Determines whether to stick
  using the `websocket` transport when a `websocket` transport failure has
  been detected after the `websocket` transport was able to successfully
  connect to the server.

| maxURILength
| no
| 2000
| The max length of the URI for a request made with the `callback-polling`
  transport. Microsoft Internet Explorer 7 and 8 are known to limit the URI
  length, so single large messages sent by CometD may fail to remain within
  the max URI length when encoded in JSON.

| useWorkerScheduler
| no
| true
| Uses the scheduler service available in Web Workers via `Worker.setTimeout(fn, delay)`
  rather than using that available via `Window.setTimeout(fn, delay)`.
  Browsers are now throttling the `Window` scheduler in background tabs to save battery
  in mobile devices, so the `Window` scheduler events are delayed by possibly several
  seconds, causing CometD sessions to timeout on the server.
  The `Worker` scheduler is not throttled and guarantees that scheduler events happen
  on time.
|===

After you have configured the `cometd` object, the Bayeux communication does
not start until you call `handshake()` (see also <<_javascript_handshake,the javascript handshake section>>).

Previous users of the JavaScript CometD implementation called a function named `init()`.
This function still exists, and it is a shorthand for calling `configure()` followed by `handshake()`.
Follow the advice in <<_javascript_handshake,the handshake section>> as it applies as well to `init()`.

[[_javascript_configure_multiple_objects]]
==== Configuring and Initializing Multiple Objects

Sometimes there is the need to connect to multiple Bayeux servers.
The default `cometd` object available as `dojox.cometd` or `$.cometd`
can only be configured to connect to one server.

However, it is easy to create other `cometd` objects.
In Dojo, there is a `dojox.CometD` (note the capital 'C' and 'D' of `CometD`)
constructor function that can be used to create new `cometd` objects.
In jQuery, there is an equivalent `$.CometD` constructor function.
It can be used in this way:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Dojo style
var cometd1 = dojox.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new dojox.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// jQuery style
var cometd1 = $.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new $.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// Configure and handshake
cometd1.init('http://host1:8080/cometd');
cometd2.init('http://host2:9090/cometd');
----
====

Note how the two `cometd` objects are initialized with different URLs.

==== Configuring Extensions in Multiple Objects

Configuring extensions in the default `cometd` object is covered in
<<_extensions,the extensions section>>.
To configure extensions for the additional `cometd` objects must be
done manually in the following way:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Dojo style
var cometd1 = dojox.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new dojox.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// jQuery style
var cometd1 = $.cometd; // The default cometd object
var cometd2 = new $.CometD(); // A second cometd object

// Configure extensions for the second object
cometd2.registerExtension('ack', new org.cometd.AckExtension());
cometd2.registerExtension('timestamp', new org.cometd.TimeStampExtension());
cometd2.registerExtension('timesync', new org.cometd.TimeSyncExtension());
cometd2.registerExtension('reload', new org.cometd.ReloadExtension());
----
====

You should not configure the extensions for the default `cometd` object in
this way, but instead follow <<_extensions,the extensions section>>.

You should configure extension manually like shown above only for additional
`cometd` objects.
You can configure zero, one, or all the extensions for the additional `cometd`
objects, depending on your application needs.
