cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_services_integration.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_services_integration]]
===== Services Integration

There are several ways to integrate your Bayeux services into your web application.
This is complicated because the `CometDServlet` creates the BayeuxServer object,
and there is no easy way to detect, in general, when the `BayeuxServer` object
has been created.

===== Integration via Configuration Servlet

The simplest way to initialize your web application with your services is to use
a configuration servlet.
This configuration servlet has no URL mapping because its only scope is to initialize
(or _wire_ together) services for your web application to work properly.

Here is a sample `web.xml`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>configuration</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>com.acme.cometd.ConfigurationServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>2</load-on-startup>
    </servlet>

</web-app>
----
====

Notice that the `web.xml` file specifies `<load-on-startup>` to be:

* 1 for the CometD servlet – so that the Bayeux object gets created and put
  in the `ServletContext`.
* 2 for the configuration servlet – so that it will be initialized only after the
  CometD servlet has been initialized and hence the BayeuxServer object is available.

This is the code for the `ConfigurationServlet`:

====
[source,java]
----
public class ConfigurationServlet extends GenericServlet {
    public void init() throws ServletException {
        // Grab the Bayeux object
        BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)getServletContext().getAttribute(BayeuxServer.ATTRIBUTE);
        new EchoService(bayeux);
        // Create other services here

        // This is also the place where you can configure the Bayeux object
        // by adding extensions or specifying a SecurityPolicy
    }

    public void service(ServletRequest request, ServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        throw new ServletException();
    }
}
----
====

See also <<_java_server_services_inherited,this section>> about the `EchoService`.

===== Integration via Configuration Listener

Instead of using a configuration servlet, you can use a configuration listener,
by writing a class that implements `ServletContextAttributeListener`.

Here is a sample `web.xml` file:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <listener>
        <listener-class>com.acme.cometd.BayeuxInitializer</listener-class>
    </listener>

</web-app>
----
====

This is the code for the `BayeuxInitializer`:

====
[source,java]
----
public class BayeuxInitializer implements ServletContextAttributeListener {
    public void attributeAdded(ServletContextAttributeEvent event) {
        if (Bayeux.ATTRIBUTE.equals(event.getName())) {
            // Grab the Bayeux object
            BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)event.getValue();
            new EchoService(bayeux);
            // Create other services here

            // This is also the place where you can configure the Bayeux object
            // by adding extensions or specifying a SecurityPolicy
        }
    }

    public void attributeRemoved(ServletContextAttributeEvent event) {
    }

    public void attributeReplaced(ServletContextAttributeEvent event) {
    }
}
----
====

===== Integration of Annotated Services

If you prefer to use annotated services (see also
<<_java_server_services_annotated,the annotated services section>>, you still
have to integrate them into your web application.
The procedure is very similar to the procedures above, but it requires use of
the annotation processor to process the annotations in your services.

For example, the `ConfigurationServlet` becomes:

====
[source,java]
----
public class ConfigurationServlet extends GenericServlet {
    private final List<Object> services = new ArrayList<>();
    private ServerAnnotationProcessor processor;

    public void init() throws ServletException {
        // Grab the BayeuxServer object
        BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)getServletContext().getAttribute(BayeuxServer.ATTRIBUTE);

        // Create the annotation processor
        processor = new ServerAnnotationProcessor(bayeux);

        // Create your annotated service instance and process it
        Object service = new EchoService();
        processor.process(service);
        services.add(service);

        // Create other services here

        // This is also the place where you can configure the Bayeux object
        // by adding extensions or specifying a SecurityPolicy
    }

    public void destroy() throws ServletException {
        // Deprocess the services that have been created
        for (Object service : services) {
            processor.deprocess(service);
        }
    }

    public void service(ServletRequest request, ServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        throw new ServletException();
    }
}
----
====

===== Integration of Annotated Services via `AnnotationCometDServlet`

The `org.cometd.java.annotation.AnnotationCometDServlet` allows you to specify
a comma-separated list of class names to instantiate and process using a
`ServerAnnotationProcessor`.

This is a sample `web.xml`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.java.annotation.AnnotationCometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <init-param>
            <param-name>services</param-name>
            <param-value>com.acme.cometd.FooService, com.acme.cometd.BarService</param-value>
        </init-param>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

In this example, the `AnnotationCometDServlet` instantiates and processes the
annotations of one object of class `com.acme.cometd.FooService` and of one object
of class `com.acme.cometd.BarService`.

The service objects are stored as `ServletContext` attributes under their own
class name, so that they can be easily retrieved by other components.
For example, `FooService` can be retrieved using the following code:

====
[source,java]
----
public class AnotherServlet extends HttpServlet {
    protected void service(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        FooService service = (FooService)getServletContext().getAttribute("com.acme.cometd.FooService");
        // Use the foo service here
    }
}
----
====

The services created are deprocessed when `AnnotationCometDServlet` is destroyed.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_services_integration.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_services_integration]]
===== Services Integration

There are several ways to integrate your Bayeux services into your web application.
This is complicated because the `CometDServlet` creates the BayeuxServer object,
and there is no easy way to detect, in general, when the `BayeuxServer` object
has been created.

===== Integration via Configuration Servlet

The simplest way to initialize your web application with your services is to use
a configuration servlet.
This configuration servlet has no URL mapping because its only scope is to initialize
(or _wire_ together) services for your web application to work properly.

Here is a sample `web.xml`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>configuration</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>com.acme.cometd.ConfigurationServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>2</load-on-startup>
    </servlet>

</web-app>
----
====

Notice that the `web.xml` file specifies `<load-on-startup>` to be:

* 1 for the CometD servlet – so that the Bayeux object gets created and put
  in the `ServletContext`.
* 2 for the configuration servlet – so that it will be initialized only after the
  CometD servlet has been initialized and hence the BayeuxServer object is available.

This is the code for the `ConfigurationServlet`:

====
[source,java]
----
public class ConfigurationServlet extends GenericServlet {
    public void init() throws ServletException {
        // Grab the Bayeux object
        BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)getServletContext().getAttribute(BayeuxServer.ATTRIBUTE);
        new EchoService(bayeux);
        // Create other services here

        // This is also the place where you can configure the Bayeux object
        // by adding extensions or specifying a SecurityPolicy
    }

    public void service(ServletRequest request, ServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        throw new ServletException();
    }
}
----
====

See also xref:_java_server_services_inherited[this section] about the `EchoService`.

===== Integration via Configuration Listener

Instead of using a configuration servlet, you can use a configuration listener,
by writing a class that implements `ServletContextAttributeListener`.

Here is a sample `web.xml` file:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <listener>
        <listener-class>com.acme.cometd.BayeuxInitializer</listener-class>
    </listener>

</web-app>
----
====

This is the code for the `BayeuxInitializer`:

====
[source,java]
----
public class BayeuxInitializer implements ServletContextAttributeListener {
    public void attributeAdded(ServletContextAttributeEvent event) {
        if (Bayeux.ATTRIBUTE.equals(event.getName())) {
            // Grab the Bayeux object
            BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)event.getValue();
            new EchoService(bayeux);
            // Create other services here

            // This is also the place where you can configure the Bayeux object
            // by adding extensions or specifying a SecurityPolicy
        }
    }

    public void attributeRemoved(ServletContextAttributeEvent event) {
    }

    public void attributeReplaced(ServletContextAttributeEvent event) {
    }
}
----
====

===== Integration of Annotated Services

If you prefer to use annotated services (see also
xref:_java_server_services_annotated[the annotated services section], you still
have to integrate them into your web application.
The procedure is very similar to the procedures above, but it requires use of
the annotation processor to process the annotations in your services.

For example, the `ConfigurationServlet` becomes:

====
[source,java]
----
public class ConfigurationServlet extends GenericServlet {
    private final List<Object> services = new ArrayList<>();
    private ServerAnnotationProcessor processor;

    public void init() throws ServletException {
        // Grab the BayeuxServer object
        BayeuxServer bayeux = (BayeuxServer)getServletContext().getAttribute(BayeuxServer.ATTRIBUTE);

        // Create the annotation processor
        processor = new ServerAnnotationProcessor(bayeux);

        // Create your annotated service instance and process it
        Object service = new EchoService();
        processor.process(service);
        services.add(service);

        // Create other services here

        // This is also the place where you can configure the Bayeux object
        // by adding extensions or specifying a SecurityPolicy
    }

    public void destroy() throws ServletException {
        // Deprocess the services that have been created
        for (Object service : services) {
            processor.deprocess(service);
        }
    }

    public void service(ServletRequest request, ServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        throw new ServletException();
    }
}
----
====

===== Integration of Annotated Services via `AnnotationCometDServlet`

The `org.cometd.java.annotation.AnnotationCometDServlet` allows you to specify
a comma-separated list of class names to instantiate and process using a
`ServerAnnotationProcessor`.

This is a sample `web.xml`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.java.annotation.AnnotationCometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <init-param>
            <param-name>services</param-name>
            <param-value>com.acme.cometd.FooService, com.acme.cometd.BarService</param-value>
        </init-param>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

In this example, the `AnnotationCometDServlet` instantiates and processes the
annotations of one object of class `com.acme.cometd.FooService` and of one object
of class `com.acme.cometd.BarService`.

The service objects are stored as `ServletContext` attributes under their own
class name, so that they can be easily retrieved by other components.
For example, `FooService` can be retrieved using the following code:

====
[source,java]
----
public class AnotherServlet extends HttpServlet {
    protected void service(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        FooService service = (FooService)getServletContext().getAttribute("com.acme.cometd.FooService");
        // Use the foo service here
    }
}
----
====

The services created are deprocessed when `AnnotationCometDServlet` is destroyed.
