cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_services_annotated.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_services_annotated]]
===== Annotated Client-Side and Server-Side Services

Classes annotated with `@Service` qualify as annotated services, both on the client-side and on the server-side.

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side]]
===== Server-Side Annotated Services

Server-side annotated services are defined by annotating class, fields and methods with annotations from the `org.cometd.annotation` and `org.cometd.annotation.server` packages.

Features provided by inherited services are available to annotated services although in a slightly different way.

Server-side inherited services are written by extending the `org.cometd.server.AbstractService` class, and instances of these classes normally have a singleton semantic and are created and configured at web application startup.
By annotating a class with `@Service` you obtain the same functionality.

The `org.cometd.server.AbstractService` class provides (via inheritance) some facilities that are useful when implementing a service, including access to the `ServerSession` associated with the service instance.
By annotating fields with `@Session` you obtain the same functionality.

Server-side inherited services provide means to register service methods to receive messages from channels.
By annotating methods with `@Listener` or `@Subscription` you obtain the same functionality.

Services might depend on other services (for example, a data source to access the database), and might require lifecycle management (that is, the services have `start()`/`stop()` methods that must be invoked at appropriate times).
In services extending `org.cometd.server.AbstractService`, dependency injection and lifecycle management had to be written by hand in a configuration servlet or configuration listeners.
By annotating fields with the standard JSR 330 `@Inject` annotation, or the standard JSR 250 `@PostConstruct` and `@PreDestroy` annotations you obtain the same functionality.

Server-side annotated services offer full support for CometD features, and limited support for dependency injection and lifecycle management via the `org.cometd.annotation.server.ServerAnnotationProcessor` class.

Annotated service instances are stored in the servlet context under the key that correspond to their full qualified class name.

===== Dependency Injection Support

The CometD project offers limited support for dependency injection, since normally this is accomplished by other frameworks such as https://spring.io/[Spring], https://github.com/google/guice[Guice]or http://cdi-spec.org/[CDI].

In particular, it supports only the injection of the BayeuxServer object on fields and methods (not on constructors), and performs the injection only if the injection has not yet been performed.

The reason for this limited support is that the CometD project does not want to implement and support a generic dependency injection container, but instead offers a simple integration with existing dependency injection containers and a minimal support for required CometD objects (such as the BayeuxServer instance).

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Inherited Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedService]
----

|
[source,java]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=inheritedService]
----
|===

The service class is annotated with `@Service` and specifies the (optional) service name "echoService".
The BayeuxServer field is annotated with the standard https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=330[JSR 330] `@Inject` annotation.
The `@Inject` annotation is supported (for example, by Spring 3 or greater) for standard dependency injection as specified by JSR 330.

===== Lifecycle Management Support

The CometD project provides lifecycle management via the standard https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=250[JSR 250] `@PostConstruct` and `@PreDestroy` annotations.
CometD offers this support for those that do not use a dependency injection container with lifecycle management such as https://spring.io[Spring].

===== Channel Configuration Support

To initialize channels before they can be actually referenced for subscriptions, the CometD API provides the `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent(String channelId, ConfigurableServerChannel.Initializer... initializers)` method, which allows you to pass initializers that configure the given channel.
Furthermore, it is useful to have a configuration step for channels that happens before any subscription or listener addition, for example, to configure authorizers on the channel (see also xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section].

In annotated services, you can use the `@Configure` annotation on methods:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedConfigure]
----

===== Session Configuration Support

Services that extend `org.cometd.server.AbstractService` have two facility methods to access the LocalSession and the ServerSession, namely `getLocalSession()` and `getServerSession()`.

In annotated services, this is accomplished using the `@Session` annotation:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedSession]
----

Fields (or methods) annotated with the `@Session` annotation are optional; you can just have the `LocalSession` field, or only the `ServerSession` field, or both or none, depending on whether you need them or not.

You cannot inject `Session` fields (or methods) with `@Inject`.
This is because the `LocalSession` object and the `ServerSession` object are related, and tied to a particular service instance.
Using a generic injection mechanism could lead to confusion (for example, using the same sessions in two different services).

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_listener]]
===== Listener Configuration Support

For server-side services, methods annotated with `@Listener` represent service methods that are invoked during the server-side processing of the message.
The channel specified by the `@Listener` annotation may be a xref:_concepts_channels_parameters[template channel].

The CometD implementation invokes `@Listener` methods with the following parameters:

* The `ServerSession` half object that sent the message.
* The `ServerMessage` that the server is processing.
* Zero or more `String` arguments corresponding to channel parameters.

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Inherited Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceMethod]
----

|
[source,java]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=inheritedServiceMethod]
----
|===

The service method may return `false` to indicate that the processing of subsequent listeners should not be performed and that the message should not be published.

[NOTE]
====
If an exception is thrown by the service method, it is caught by the CometD implementation and logged at `INFO` level on a logger category corresponding to the class name of the service, and no further action is taken by CometD.
====

The channel specified by the `@Listener` annotation may be a xref:_concepts_channels_parameters[template channel].

In this case, you must add the corresponding number of parameters (of type `String`) to the signature of the service method, and annotate each additional parameters with `@org.cometd.annotation.Param`, making sure to match the parameter names between channel parameters and `@Param` annotations in the same order:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceWithParams]
----

[NOTE]
====
Note how for the two channel parameters defined in the `@Listener` annotation there are two additional parameters in the method signature (they must be added after the `ServerSession` and the `ServerMessage` parameters), of type `String` and annotated with `@Param`.
The `@Param` annotation must specify a parameter name declared by the template channel.
The order of parameters defined by the template channel must be the same of the parameters of the service method annotated with `@Param`.

Only messages whose channel match the template channel defined by `@Listener` will be delivered to the service method.
In the example above, messages to channel `/news/weather` or `/news/sport/athletics/decathlon` will not be delivered to the service method, because those channel do not bind with the template channel (respectively, too few segments and too many segments), while messages to `/news/technology/cometd` will be delivered, with the `category` argument bound to string `"technology"` and the `event` argument bound to string `"cometd"`.
====

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_subscription]]
===== Subscription Configuration Support

For server-side services, methods annotated with `@Subscription` represent callbacks that are invoked during the local-side processing of the message.
The local-side processing is equivalent to the remote client-side processing, but it is local to the server.
The semantic is very similar to the remote client-side processing, in the sense that the message has completed the server-side processing and has been published.
When it arrives to the local side the information on the publisher is not available anymore, and the message is a plain `org.cometd.bayeux.Message` and not a `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerMessage`, exactly as it would happen for a remote client.

This is a rarer use case (most of the time user code must be triggered with `@Listener` semantic), but nonetheless is available.

The service method signature must have:

* One parameter of type `Message`, representing the message that the server is processing.
* Zero or more parameters of type `String` corresponding to channel parameters if the channel is a template channel.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedSubscriptionMethod]
----

The channel specified by the `@Subscription` annotation may be a xref:_concepts_channels_parameters[template channel] similarly to what already documented in the xref:_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_listener[listener section].

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_binary]]
===== Server-Side Annotated Service with Binary Data

Services that receives binary data are similar to other annotated services.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled as specified in xref:_extensions_binary[the binary extension section].

The only difference is that the `data` field of the message is an object of type `org.cometd.bayeux.BinaryData`.

For example:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceBinary]
----

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_remote_call]]
===== Remote Call Configuration Support

For server-side services only, methods annotated with `@RemoteCall` represent targets of xref:_javascript_rpc[client remote calls].

Remote calls are particularly useful for clients that want to perform server-side actions that may not involve messaging (although they could).
Typical examples are retrieving/storing data from/to a database, update some server state, or trigger calls to external systems.

A remote call performed by a client is converted to a message published on a service channel.
The CometD implementation takes care of correlating the request with the response and takes care of the handling of failure cases.
Applications are exposed to a much simpler API, but the underlying mechanism is a sender that publishes a Bayeux message on a service channel (the request), along with the xref:_concepts_application_peer_communication[delivery] of the response Bayeux message back to the sender.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceRemoteCall]
----

In the example above, the `@RemoteCall` annotation specifies as target `/contacts`.
The target string is used to build a service channel, may or may not start with the `/` character, and may even be composed of multiple segments such as `contacts/active`.
The target string specified by the `@RemoteCall` annotation may have parameters such as `contacts/{userId}`, and the signature of the method annotated with `@RemoteCall` must change with the same rules explained for `@Listener`xref:_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_listener[methods].

The method `retrieveContacts(...)` takes two parameters:

* A `RemoteCall.Caller` object that represents the remote client that made the call.
* An `Object` object that represents the data sent by the remote client.

The `caller` object wraps the `ServerSession` that represents the remote client, while the `data` object represent the Bayeux message `data` field.

The type of the second parameter may be any class that is deserialized as the `data` field of the Bayeux message, even a custom application class.
For more information about custom deserialization, see xref:_java_json[the JSON section].

The application may implement the `retrieveContacts` method as it wishes, provided that it replies to the client by calling either `RemoteCall.Caller.result()` or `RemoteCall.Caller.failure()`.
If either of these methods is not called, the client will, by default, timeout the call on the client-side.

In case the method annotated with `@RemoteCall` throws an uncaught exception, the CometD implementation will perform a call to `RemoteCall.Caller.failure()` on behalf of the application.
Applications are suggested to wrap the code of the method annotated with `@RemoteCall` with a `try/catch` block like shown in the example above.

===== Annotation Processing

The `org.cometd.annotation.server.ServerAnnotationProcessor` class performs the annotation processing, in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tag=annotationProcessing]
----

After the `ServerAnnotationProcessor.process()` method returns, the annotations present on the service class have been processed, possibly injecting the `BayeuxServer` instance, the `Session` instances, calling initialization lifecycle methods, and registering listeners and subscribers.

Symmetrically, `ServerAnnotationProcessor.deprocess()` performs annotation deprocessing, which deregisters listeners and subscribers and calls destruction lifecycle methods, but does not deinject the `BayeuxServer` instance or `Session` instances.

[[_java_client_services_annotated]]
===== Client-Side Annotated Services

Like their server-side counterpart, client-side services consist in classes annotated with `@Service`.

CometD introduced client-side services to reduce the boilerplate code required:

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Traditional Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotated]
----

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=traditional]
----
|===

===== Dependency Injection and Lifecycle Management Support

The CometD project does not offer dependency injection for client-side services, but supports lifecycle management via the standard https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=250[JSR 250] `@PostConstruct` and `@PreDestroy` annotations.
Client-side services usually have a shorter lifecycle than server-side services and their dependencies are usually injected directly while creating the client-side service instance.

===== Session Configuration Support

In client-side annotated services, the `@Session` annotation allows the service instance to have the `BayeuxClient` (or `ClientSession`) instance injected in a field or method.
Like server-side annotated services, the session field (or method) cannot be injected with `@Inject`.
This is to allow the maximum configuration flexibility between service instances and `BayeuxClient` instances.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotatedService]
----

[[_java_client_services_annotated_listener]]
===== Listener Configuration Support

In client-side annotated services, methods annotated with `@Listener` represent service methods that are called upon receipt of messages on meta channels.
Do not use listener service methods to subscribe to broadcast channels, see xref:_java_client_services_annotated_subscription[this section] instead.

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Traditional Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotatedListener]
----

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=traditionalListener]
----
|===

[[_java_client_services_annotated_subscription]]
===== Subscription Configuration Support

In client-side annotated services, methods annotated with `@Subscription` represent service methods that are called upon receipt of messages on broadcast channels.

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Traditional Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotatedSubscription]
----

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=traditionalSubscription]
----
|===

===== Annotation Processing

The `org.cometd.annotation.client.ClientAnnotationProcessor` class performs the annotation processing, in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotationProcessing]
----

Listeners are configured immediately on the `BayeuxClient` object, while subscriptions are delayed until the handshake is successfully completed.

Commit message:

Renamed module cometd-java-client-websocket-javax to cometd-java-client-websocket-jakarta. Renamed module cometd-java-server-websocket-javax to cometd-java-server-websocket-jakarta. Renamed other occurrences of javax to jakarta. Updated documentation to get rid of old reference to JSRs.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_services_annotated.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_services_annotated]]
===== Annotated Client-Side and Server-Side Services

Classes annotated with `@Service` qualify as annotated services, both on the client-side and on the server-side.

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side]]
===== Server-Side Annotated Services

Server-side annotated services are defined by annotating class, fields and methods with annotations from the `org.cometd.annotation` and `org.cometd.annotation.server` packages.

Features provided by inherited services are available to annotated services although in a slightly different way.

Server-side inherited services are written by extending the `org.cometd.server.AbstractService` class, and instances of these classes normally have a singleton semantic and are created and configured at web application startup.
By annotating a class with `@Service` you obtain the same functionality.

The `org.cometd.server.AbstractService` class provides (via inheritance) some facilities that are useful when implementing a service, including access to the `ServerSession` associated with the service instance.
By annotating fields with `@Session` you obtain the same functionality.

Server-side inherited services provide means to register service methods to receive messages from channels.
By annotating methods with `@Listener` or `@Subscription` you obtain the same functionality.

Services might depend on other services (for example, a data source to access the database), and might require lifecycle management (that is, the services have `start()`/`stop()` methods that must be invoked at appropriate times).
In services extending `org.cometd.server.AbstractService`, dependency injection and lifecycle management had to be written by hand in a configuration servlet or configuration listeners.
By annotating fields with the standard `@Inject` annotation, or the standard `@PostConstruct` and `@PreDestroy` annotations you obtain the same functionality.

Server-side annotated services offer full support for CometD features, and limited support for dependency injection and lifecycle management via the `org.cometd.annotation.server.ServerAnnotationProcessor` class.

Annotated service instances are stored in the servlet context under the key that correspond to their full qualified class name.

===== Dependency Injection Support

The CometD project offers limited support for dependency injection, since normally this is accomplished by other frameworks such as https://spring.io/[Spring], https://github.com/google/guice[Guice]or http://cdi-spec.org/[CDI].

In particular, it supports only the injection of the BayeuxServer object on fields and methods (not on constructors), and performs the injection only if the injection has not yet been performed.

The reason for this limited support is that the CometD project does not want to implement and support a generic dependency injection container, but instead offers a simple integration with existing dependency injection containers and a minimal support for required CometD objects (such as the BayeuxServer instance).

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Inherited Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedService]
----

|
[source,java]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=inheritedService]
----
|===

The service class is annotated with `@Service` and specifies the (optional) service name "echoService".
The BayeuxServer field is annotated with the Jakarta `@Inject` annotation.
The Jakarta `@Inject` annotation is supported also by other dependency injection frameworks (such as Spring).

===== Lifecycle Management Support

The CometD project provides lifecycle management via the Jakarta `@PostConstruct` and `@PreDestroy` annotations.
CometD offers this support for those that do not use a dependency injection container with lifecycle management such as https://spring.io[Spring].

===== Channel Configuration Support

To initialize channels before they can be actually referenced for subscriptions, the CometD API provides the `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent(String channelId, ConfigurableServerChannel.Initializer... initializers)` method, which allows you to pass initializers that configure the given channel.
Furthermore, it is useful to have a configuration step for channels that happens before any subscription or listener addition, for example, to configure authorizers on the channel (see also xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section].

In annotated services, you can use the `@Configure` annotation on methods:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedConfigure]
----

===== Session Configuration Support

Services that extend `org.cometd.server.AbstractService` have two facility methods to access the LocalSession and the ServerSession, namely `getLocalSession()` and `getServerSession()`.

In annotated services, this is accomplished using the `@Session` annotation:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedSession]
----

Fields (or methods) annotated with the `@Session` annotation are optional; you can just have the `LocalSession` field, or only the `ServerSession` field, or both or none, depending on whether you need them or not.

You cannot inject `Session` fields (or methods) with `@Inject`.
This is because the `LocalSession` object and the `ServerSession` object are related, and tied to a particular service instance.
Using a generic injection mechanism could lead to confusion (for example, using the same sessions in two different services).

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_listener]]
===== Listener Configuration Support

For server-side services, methods annotated with `@Listener` represent service methods that are invoked during the server-side processing of the message.
The channel specified by the `@Listener` annotation may be a xref:_concepts_channels_parameters[template channel].

The CometD implementation invokes `@Listener` methods with the following parameters:

* The `ServerSession` half object that sent the message.
* The `ServerMessage` that the server is processing.
* Zero or more `String` arguments corresponding to channel parameters.

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Inherited Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceMethod]
----

|
[source,java]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=inheritedServiceMethod]
----
|===

The service method may return `false` to indicate that the processing of subsequent listeners should not be performed and that the message should not be published.

[NOTE]
====
If an exception is thrown by the service method, it is caught by the CometD implementation and logged at `INFO` level on a logger category corresponding to the class name of the service, and no further action is taken by CometD.
====

The channel specified by the `@Listener` annotation may be a xref:_concepts_channels_parameters[template channel].

In this case, you must add the corresponding number of parameters (of type `String`) to the signature of the service method, and annotate each additional parameters with `@org.cometd.annotation.Param`, making sure to match the parameter names between channel parameters and `@Param` annotations in the same order:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceWithParams]
----

[NOTE]
====
Note how for the two channel parameters defined in the `@Listener` annotation there are two additional parameters in the method signature (they must be added after the `ServerSession` and the `ServerMessage` parameters), of type `String` and annotated with `@Param`.
The `@Param` annotation must specify a parameter name declared by the template channel.
The order of parameters defined by the template channel must be the same of the parameters of the service method annotated with `@Param`.

Only messages whose channel match the template channel defined by `@Listener` will be delivered to the service method.
In the example above, messages to channel `/news/weather` or `/news/sport/athletics/decathlon` will not be delivered to the service method, because those channel do not bind with the template channel (respectively, too few segments and too many segments), while messages to `/news/technology/cometd` will be delivered, with the `category` argument bound to string `"technology"` and the `event` argument bound to string `"cometd"`.
====

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_subscription]]
===== Subscription Configuration Support

For server-side services, methods annotated with `@Subscription` represent callbacks that are invoked during the local-side processing of the message.
The local-side processing is equivalent to the remote client-side processing, but it is local to the server.
The semantic is very similar to the remote client-side processing, in the sense that the message has completed the server-side processing and has been published.
When it arrives to the local side the information on the publisher is not available anymore, and the message is a plain `org.cometd.bayeux.Message` and not a `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerMessage`, exactly as it would happen for a remote client.

This is a rarer use case (most of the time user code must be triggered with `@Listener` semantic), but nonetheless is available.

The service method signature must have:

* One parameter of type `Message`, representing the message that the server is processing.
* Zero or more parameters of type `String` corresponding to channel parameters if the channel is a template channel.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedSubscriptionMethod]
----

The channel specified by the `@Subscription` annotation may be a xref:_concepts_channels_parameters[template channel] similarly to what already documented in the xref:_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_listener[listener section].

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_binary]]
===== Server-Side Annotated Service with Binary Data

Services that receives binary data are similar to other annotated services.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled as specified in xref:_extensions_binary[the binary extension section].

The only difference is that the `data` field of the message is an object of type `org.cometd.bayeux.BinaryData`.

For example:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceBinary]
----

[[_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_remote_call]]
===== Remote Call Configuration Support

For server-side services only, methods annotated with `@RemoteCall` represent targets of xref:_javascript_rpc[client remote calls].

Remote calls are particularly useful for clients that want to perform server-side actions that may not involve messaging (although they could).
Typical examples are retrieving/storing data from/to a database, update some server state, or trigger calls to external systems.

A remote call performed by a client is converted to a message published on a service channel.
The CometD implementation takes care of correlating the request with the response and takes care of the handling of failure cases.
Applications are exposed to a much simpler API, but the underlying mechanism is a sender that publishes a Bayeux message on a service channel (the request), along with the xref:_concepts_application_peer_communication[delivery] of the response Bayeux message back to the sender.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tags=annotatedServiceRemoteCall]
----

In the example above, the `@RemoteCall` annotation specifies as target `/contacts`.
The target string is used to build a service channel, may or may not start with the `/` character, and may even be composed of multiple segments such as `contacts/active`.
The target string specified by the `@RemoteCall` annotation may have parameters such as `contacts/{userId}`, and the signature of the method annotated with `@RemoteCall` must change with the same rules explained for `@Listener`xref:_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_listener[methods].

The method `retrieveContacts(...)` takes two parameters:

* A `RemoteCall.Caller` object that represents the remote client that made the call.
* An `Object` object that represents the data sent by the remote client.

The `caller` object wraps the `ServerSession` that represents the remote client, while the `data` object represent the Bayeux message `data` field.

The type of the second parameter may be any class that is deserialized as the `data` field of the Bayeux message, even a custom application class.
For more information about custom deserialization, see xref:_java_json[the JSON section].

The application may implement the `retrieveContacts` method as it wishes, provided that it replies to the client by calling either `RemoteCall.Caller.result()` or `RemoteCall.Caller.failure()`.
If either of these methods is not called, the client will, by default, timeout the call on the client-side.

In case the method annotated with `@RemoteCall` throws an uncaught exception, the CometD implementation will perform a call to `RemoteCall.Caller.failure()` on behalf of the application.
Applications are suggested to wrap the code of the method annotated with `@RemoteCall` with a `try/catch` block like shown in the example above.

===== Annotation Processing

The `org.cometd.annotation.server.ServerAnnotationProcessor` class performs the annotation processing, in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerServiceDocs.java[tag=annotationProcessing]
----

After the `ServerAnnotationProcessor.process()` method returns, the annotations present on the service class have been processed, possibly injecting the `BayeuxServer` instance, the `Session` instances, calling initialization lifecycle methods, and registering listeners and subscribers.

Symmetrically, `ServerAnnotationProcessor.deprocess()` performs annotation deprocessing, which deregisters listeners and subscribers and calls destruction lifecycle methods, but does not deinject the `BayeuxServer` instance or `Session` instances.

[[_java_client_services_annotated]]
===== Client-Side Annotated Services

Like their server-side counterpart, client-side services consist in classes annotated with `@Service`.

CometD introduced client-side services to reduce the boilerplate code required:

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Traditional Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotated]
----

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=traditional]
----
|===

===== Dependency Injection and Lifecycle Management Support

The CometD project does not offer dependency injection for client-side services, but supports lifecycle management via the Jakarta `@PostConstruct` and `@PreDestroy` annotations.
Client-side services usually have a shorter lifecycle than server-side services and their dependencies are usually injected directly while creating the client-side service instance.

===== Session Configuration Support

In client-side annotated services, the `@Session` annotation allows the service instance to have the `BayeuxClient` (or `ClientSession`) instance injected in a field or method.
Like server-side annotated services, the session field (or method) cannot be injected with `@Inject`.
This is to allow the maximum configuration flexibility between service instances and `BayeuxClient` instances.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotatedService]
----

[[_java_client_services_annotated_listener]]
===== Listener Configuration Support

In client-side annotated services, methods annotated with `@Listener` represent service methods that are called upon receipt of messages on meta channels.
Do not use listener service methods to subscribe to broadcast channels, see xref:_java_client_services_annotated_subscription[this section] instead.

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Traditional Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotatedListener]
----

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=traditionalListener]
----
|===

[[_java_client_services_annotated_subscription]]
===== Subscription Configuration Support

In client-side annotated services, methods annotated with `@Subscription` represent service methods that are called upon receipt of messages on broadcast channels.

[cols="1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| Annotated Style
| Traditional Style

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotatedSubscription]
----

|
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=traditionalSubscription]
----
|===

===== Annotation Processing

The `org.cometd.annotation.client.ClientAnnotationProcessor` class performs the annotation processing, in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/client/ClientServiceDocs.java[tag=annotationProcessing]
----

Listeners are configured immediately on the `BayeuxClient` object, while subscriptions are delayed until the handshake is successfully completed.
