cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_handshake.adoc, before:


[[_javascript_handshake]]
=== Handshaking

In order to initiate the communication with the Bayeux server, you must call
either the `handshake()` or the `init()` functions on the `cometd` object.
The `init()` function is a shorthand for a call to `configure()` (see
<<_javascript_configure,the javascript configuration section>>) followed by
a call to `handshake()`.

Calling `handshake()` effectively sends a handshake message request to the
server, and the Bayeux protocol requires that the server sends to the client
a handshake message reply.

The Bayeux handshake creates a network communication with the Bayeux server,
negotiates the type of transport to use, and negotiates a number of protocol
parameters to be used in subsequent communications.

Once `handshake()` has been called, you must not call `handshake()` again
unless you have explicitly disconnected by calling `disconnect()`.

This is typically easy to enforce, by binding the call to `handshake()`
to the page load event (that happens only once).

Alternatively, if the `handshake()` is triggered by interaction with the user
interface (for example by clicking on a button), it is fairly easy to either
disable the user interface (for example, disabling the button immediately
after the click), or use a boolean variable to guard against multiple
handshakes.

As with several functions of the JavaScript CometD API, `handshake()` is an
asynchronous function: it returns immediately, well before the Bayeux handshake
steps have completed.

[NOTE]
====
Calling `handshake()` _does not_ mean that you have completed the handshake
with the server when `handshake()` returns.
====

It is possible to invoke the `handshake()` function passing as parameter a
callback function that will be invoked when the handshake message reply from
the server arrives to the client (or, in case the server does not reply, when
the client detects a handshake failure):

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Configure
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake with callback
cometd.init(function(handshakeReply) {
    if (handshakeReply.successful) {
        // Successfully connected to the server.
        // Now it is possible to subscribe or send messages
    } else {
        // Cannot handshake with the server, alert user.
    }
});
----
====

Passing a callback function to `handshake()` is equivalent to register a
`/meta/handshake` listener (see also <<_javascript_subscribe_vs_listen,this section>>).

The handshake might fail for several reasons:

* You mistyped the server URL.
* The transport could not be negotiated successfully.
* The server denied the handshake (for example, the authentication credentials were wrong).
* The server crashed.
* There was a network failure.

In case of a handshake failure, applications should not try to call `handshake()`
again: the CometD library will do this on behalf of the application.
A corollary of this is that applications should usually only ever call `handshake()`
once in their code.

Since the `handshake()` call is asynchronous, it is not a good idea to write this code:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// WRONG CODE

cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake
cometd.handshake();

// Publish to a channel
cometd.publish('/foo', { foo: 'bar' });
----
====

It is not a good idea because there is no guarantee that the call to `publish()` (see
<<_javascript_publish,the javascript publish section>>) can actually succeed in contacting
the Bayeux server.
Since the API is asynchronous, you have no way of knowing synchronously (that is, by having
`handshake()` function return an error code or by throwing an exception) that the handshake failed.

The right way is the following:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake
cometd.handshake(function(handshakeReply) {
    if (handshakeReply.successful) {
        // Publish to a channel
        cometd.publish('/foo', { foo: 'bar' });
    }
});
----
====

If you want to pass additional information to the handshake message (for example,
authentication credentials) you can pass an additional object to the `handshake()` function:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake with additional information.
var additional = {
    com.acme.credentials: {
        user: 'cometd',
        token: 'xyzsecretabc'
    }
};
cometd.handshake(additional, function(handshakeReply) {
    if (handshakeReply.successful) {
        // Your logic here.
    }
});
----
====

The additional object will be _merged_ into the handshake message.

The server will be able to access the message (but not yet the session)
from a `/meta/handshake` listener, for example using annotated services
(see also <<_java_server_services_annotated,the annotated services section>>):

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class MyService {
    @Listener(Channel.META_HANDSHAKE)
    public void metaHandshake(ServerSession remote, ServerMessage message) {
        // Parameter "remote" will be null here.

        Map<String, Object> credentials = (Map<String, Object>)message.get("com.acme.credentials");
        // Verify credentials.
    }
}
----
====

For more advanced processing of the handshake message that require the
availability of the `ServerSession`, see
<<_java_server_authentication,the authentication section>>.

The additional object must not be used to tamper the handshake message by using
reserved fields defined by the Bayeux protocol (see also <<_bayeux,the Bayeux protocol section>>).
Instead, you should use field names that are unique to your application, better
yet when fully qualified like `com.acme.credentials`.

The CometD JavaScript API offer an easy way to receive notifications about the
details of the Bayeux protocol message exchange: either by adding listeners to
special channels (called _meta channels_), explained in
<<_javascript_subscribe,the javascript subscribe section>>, or by passing callback
functions to the API like you did for `handshake()` in the example above.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_handshake.adoc, after:


[[_javascript_handshake]]
=== Handshaking

In order to initiate the communication with the Bayeux server, you must call
either the `handshake()` or the `init()` functions on the `cometd` object.
The `init()` function is a shorthand for a call to `configure()` (see
xref:_javascript_configure[the javascript configuration section]) followed by
a call to `handshake()`.

Calling `handshake()` effectively sends a handshake message request to the
server, and the Bayeux protocol requires that the server sends to the client
a handshake message reply.

The Bayeux handshake creates a network communication with the Bayeux server,
negotiates the type of transport to use, and negotiates a number of protocol
parameters to be used in subsequent communications.

Once `handshake()` has been called, you must not call `handshake()` again
unless you have explicitly disconnected by calling `disconnect()`.

This is typically easy to enforce, by binding the call to `handshake()`
to the page load event (that happens only once).

Alternatively, if the `handshake()` is triggered by interaction with the user
interface (for example by clicking on a button), it is fairly easy to either
disable the user interface (for example, disabling the button immediately
after the click), or use a boolean variable to guard against multiple
handshakes.

As with several functions of the JavaScript CometD API, `handshake()` is an
asynchronous function: it returns immediately, well before the Bayeux handshake
steps have completed.

[NOTE]
====
Calling `handshake()` _does not_ mean that you have completed the handshake
with the server when `handshake()` returns.
====

It is possible to invoke the `handshake()` function passing as parameter a
callback function that will be invoked when the handshake message reply from
the server arrives to the client (or, in case the server does not reply, when
the client detects a handshake failure):

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Configure
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake with callback
cometd.init(function(handshakeReply) {
    if (handshakeReply.successful) {
        // Successfully connected to the server.
        // Now it is possible to subscribe or send messages
    } else {
        // Cannot handshake with the server, alert user.
    }
});
----
====

Passing a callback function to `handshake()` is equivalent to register a
`/meta/handshake` listener (see also xref:_javascript_subscribe_vs_listen[this section]).

The handshake might fail for several reasons:

* You mistyped the server URL.
* The transport could not be negotiated successfully.
* The server denied the handshake (for example, the authentication credentials were wrong).
* The server crashed.
* There was a network failure.

In case of a handshake failure, applications should not try to call `handshake()`
again: the CometD library will do this on behalf of the application.
A corollary of this is that applications should usually only ever call `handshake()`
once in their code.

Since the `handshake()` call is asynchronous, it is not a good idea to write this code:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// WRONG CODE

cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake
cometd.handshake();

// Publish to a channel
cometd.publish('/foo', { foo: 'bar' });
----
====

It is not a good idea because there is no guarantee that the call to `publish()` (see
xref:_javascript_publish[the javascript publish section]) can actually succeed in contacting
the Bayeux server.
Since the API is asynchronous, you have no way of knowing synchronously (that is, by having
`handshake()` function return an error code or by throwing an exception) that the handshake failed.

The right way is the following:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake
cometd.handshake(function(handshakeReply) {
    if (handshakeReply.successful) {
        // Publish to a channel
        cometd.publish('/foo', { foo: 'bar' });
    }
});
----
====

If you want to pass additional information to the handshake message (for example,
authentication credentials) you can pass an additional object to the `handshake()` function:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd'
});

// Handshake with additional information.
var additional = {
    com.acme.credentials: {
        user: 'cometd',
        token: 'xyzsecretabc'
    }
};
cometd.handshake(additional, function(handshakeReply) {
    if (handshakeReply.successful) {
        // Your logic here.
    }
});
----
====

The additional object will be _merged_ into the handshake message.

The server will be able to access the message (but not yet the session)
from a `/meta/handshake` listener, for example using annotated services
(see also xref:_java_server_services_annotated[the annotated services section]):

====
[source,java]
----
@Service
public class MyService {
    @Listener(Channel.META_HANDSHAKE)
    public void metaHandshake(ServerSession remote, ServerMessage message) {
        // Parameter "remote" will be null here.

        Map<String, Object> credentials = (Map<String, Object>)message.get("com.acme.credentials");
        // Verify credentials.
    }
}
----
====

For more advanced processing of the handshake message that require the
availability of the `ServerSession`, see
xref:_java_server_authentication[the authentication section].

The additional object must not be used to tamper the handshake message by using
reserved fields defined by the Bayeux protocol (see also xref:_bayeux[the Bayeux protocol section]).
Instead, you should use field names that are unique to your application, better
yet when fully qualified like `com.acme.credentials`.

The CometD JavaScript API offer an easy way to receive notifications about the
details of the Bayeux protocol message exchange: either by adding listeners to
special channels (called _meta channels_), explained in
xref:_javascript_subscribe[the javascript subscribe section], or by passing callback
functions to the API like you did for `handshake()` in the example above.
