cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_multiple_sessions.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_multiple_sessions]]
==== Multiple Sessions

==== Multiple Sessions with HTTP/1.1

In the HTTP/1.1 protocol, clients such as browsers open a limited number of
connections for each domain, typically 6.

https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616[RFC 2616] recommended that client opened no
more than two connections per domain.
This limit has been removed in https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230[RFC 7230],
but it is still not a good idea to open too many connections to a domain.

Clients such as browsers that have this _implementation_ limit for the HTTP/1.1
protocol consequently limit also the number of concurrent, outstanding, requests
that they can make to a server.

In browsers, all the tabs pointing to the same domain will share this small,
per domain, connection pool.
If a user opens 6 browser tabs to the same CometD application (and therefore,
the same domain), then 6 long poll requests will be sent to the server,
therefore consuming all available connections.
This means that any further communication with the server (for example,
the publish of a message, but also any other interaction, either via clicking
on a link or using `XMLHttpRequest`) will be queued and will wait for one of the
long polls to return before taking the chance to be sent to the server.

This is not good for the user experience.
An interaction of the user with the application should result in some immediate
feedback, but instead the interaction is queued for many seconds, leaving the
user with the doubt that interaction with the user interface really happened,
causing frustration in using the application.

The CometD Server implements the `multiple-clients` advice (see also
<<_bayeux_multiple_clients_advice,this section>>).
The server uses `BAYEUX_BROWSER` cookie to detect multiple CometD sessions from
the same browser.

When the CometD server detects multiple sessions, it uses the parameter
`maxSessionsPerBrowser` (by default set to 1) to decide how many sessions (or,
equivalently, how many long polls) are allowed for that client when it uses the
HTTP/1.1 protocol (see also
<<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>>).
Additional long poll requests will be returned immediately by the server
with the `multiple-clients` field of the `advice` object set to true.
A negative value for `maxSessionsPerBrowser` allows unlimited number of long polls.

The `advice` object also contains an `interval` field set to the value of the
`multiSessionInterval` parameter (see also
<<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>>).
This instructs the client not to send another poll until that interval has elapsed.
The effect of this `advice` is that additional client sessions will perform
normal polls (not long polls) to the server with a period of `multiSessionInterval`.
This avoids consuming all the HTTP connections at the cost of some latency for
the additional tabs.

The recommendation is that the client application monitors the `/meta/connect`
channel for `multiple-clients` field in the `advice` object.
If detected, the application might ask the user to close the additional tabs,
or it could automatically close them, or take some other action.

Non-browser clients should handle the `BAYEUX_BROWSER` cookie with the same
semantic of browsers: store the cookies and send them along with subsequent
requests to the corresponding domains.
This ensures two things: that the server can recognize valid sessions (see
<<_security,the security section>>), and that the server can detect multiple
sessions from the same client.

==== Multiple Sessions with HTTP/2

The HTTP/2 protocol uses a single connection for each domain, and a large
number of concurrent requests can be multiplexed within this single connection.
This has the effect of removing the limit of concurrent, outstanding, requests
that a client can make to the server, allowing the server to support
as many long poll requests as the client wants.

The parameter `http2MaxSessionsPerBrowser` (by default set to -1) controls
the number of sessions (or, equivalently, how many long polls) that are allowed
for that client when it uses the HTTP/2 protocol (see also
<<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>>).

A negative value of `http2MaxSessionsPerBrowser` allows an unlimited number of
sessions; a positive value restricts the max number of session allowed per client.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_multiple_sessions.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_multiple_sessions]]
==== Multiple Sessions

==== Multiple Sessions with HTTP/1.1

In the HTTP/1.1 protocol, clients such as browsers open a limited number of
connections for each domain, typically 6.

https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616[RFC 2616] recommended that client opened no
more than two connections per domain.
This limit has been removed in https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230[RFC 7230],
but it is still not a good idea to open too many connections to a domain.

Clients such as browsers that have this _implementation_ limit for the HTTP/1.1
protocol consequently limit also the number of concurrent, outstanding, requests
that they can make to a server.

In browsers, all the tabs pointing to the same domain will share this small,
per domain, connection pool.
If a user opens 6 browser tabs to the same CometD application (and therefore,
the same domain), then 6 long poll requests will be sent to the server,
therefore consuming all available connections.
This means that any further communication with the server (for example,
the publish of a message, but also any other interaction, either via clicking
on a link or using `XMLHttpRequest`) will be queued and will wait for one of the
long polls to return before taking the chance to be sent to the server.

This is not good for the user experience.
An interaction of the user with the application should result in some immediate
feedback, but instead the interaction is queued for many seconds, leaving the
user with the doubt that interaction with the user interface really happened,
causing frustration in using the application.

The CometD Server implements the `multiple-clients` advice (see also
xref:_bayeux_multiple_clients_advice[this section]).
The server uses `BAYEUX_BROWSER` cookie to detect multiple CometD sessions from
the same browser.

When the CometD server detects multiple sessions, it uses the parameter
`maxSessionsPerBrowser` (by default set to 1) to decide how many sessions (or,
equivalently, how many long polls) are allowed for that client when it uses the
HTTP/1.1 protocol (see also
xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section]).
Additional long poll requests will be returned immediately by the server
with the `multiple-clients` field of the `advice` object set to true.
A negative value for `maxSessionsPerBrowser` allows unlimited number of long polls.

The `advice` object also contains an `interval` field set to the value of the
`multiSessionInterval` parameter (see also
xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section]).
This instructs the client not to send another poll until that interval has elapsed.
The effect of this `advice` is that additional client sessions will perform
normal polls (not long polls) to the server with a period of `multiSessionInterval`.
This avoids consuming all the HTTP connections at the cost of some latency for
the additional tabs.

The recommendation is that the client application monitors the `/meta/connect`
channel for `multiple-clients` field in the `advice` object.
If detected, the application might ask the user to close the additional tabs,
or it could automatically close them, or take some other action.

Non-browser clients should handle the `BAYEUX_BROWSER` cookie with the same
semantic of browsers: store the cookies and send them along with subsequent
requests to the corresponding domains.
This ensures two things: that the server can recognize valid sessions (see
xref:_security[the security section]), and that the server can detect multiple
sessions from the same client.

==== Multiple Sessions with HTTP/2

The HTTP/2 protocol uses a single connection for each domain, and a large
number of concurrent requests can be multiplexed within this single connection.
This has the effect of removing the limit of concurrent, outstanding, requests
that a client can make to the server, allowing the server to support
as many long poll requests as the client wants.

The parameter `http2MaxSessionsPerBrowser` (by default set to -1) controls
the number of sessions (or, equivalently, how many long polls) that are allowed
for that client when it uses the HTTP/2 protocol (see also
xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section]).

A negative value of `http2MaxSessionsPerBrowser` allows an unlimited number of
sessions; a positive value restricts the max number of session allowed per client.
