cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_oort_service.adoc, before:


[[_java_oort_objects_oort_service]]
==== OortService

An `org.cometd.oort.OortService` is a named CometD service (see also
<<_java_server_services,the services section>>) that forwards actions from a
_requesting_ node to the node in the cluster that owns the data onto which
the action must be performed, called the _owner_ node, and receives the
action result back.

`OortService` builds on the concept introduced by `OortObject` that the
ownership of a particular data entity belongs to one node only.
Any node can read the data entity, but only the owner can create/modify/delete it.
In order to perform actions that modify the data entity, a node has to know
what is the node that owns the data entity, and then forward the action to
the owner node. `OortService` provides the facilities to forward the action
to the owner node and receive the result of the action, or its failure.

Class `org.cometd.oort.OortService` must be subclassed by the application to
implement key methods that perform the action logic.

The typical workflow of an `OortService` is the following:

. The `OortService` receives a message from a remote client.
  The message contains enough information for the `OortService` to determine
  which node owns the data onto which the action must be applied, in the form
  of the owner node's Oort URL.
. Once the owner node Oort URL is known, the `OortService` can forward the
  action by calling method `forward(...)`, passing in action information and
  an opaque context.
  The owner node may be the node that received the message from the remote
  client itself, and applications do not need to do anything different from
  the case where the owner node is a different one.
. The action arrives to the owner node and CometD invokes method `onForward(...)`
  on the `OortService` that resides on the owner node, passing in the action
  information sent from the second step.
  Method `onForward(...)` is implemented by application to perform the custom
  logic and may return a successful result or a failure.
. The successful action result returned by `onForward(...)` is sent back by
  CometD to the requesting node, and when it arrives there, CometD invokes
  method `onForwardSucceeded(...)`, passing in the result of the action
  returned by `onForward(...)` and the opaque context passed to the `forward(...)`
  method in the second step.
  Method `onForwardSucceeded(...)` is implemented by the application.
. The action failure returned by `onForward(...)` is sent back by CometD to
  the requesting node, and when it arrives there, CometD invokes method
  `onForwardFailed(...)`, passing in the failure returned by `onForward(...)`
  and the opaque context passed to the `forward(...)` method in the second step.
  Method `onForwardFailed(...)` is implemented by the application.

[[_java_oort_objects_oort_service_creation]]
===== OortService Creation

`OortService` are uniquely named across the cluster, and are usually created
at startup by subclassing them.
Since they are CometD services, they are usually annotated to listen for messages
on certain channels (see also <<_java_server_services_annotated,the annotated services section>>
for further details on service annotations):

====
[source,java]
----
ServerAnnotationProcessor processor = ...;
Oort oort = ...;

// Create the service instance and process its annotations
NameEditService nameEditService = new NameEditService(oort);
processor.process(nameEditService);
----
====

where the `NameEditService` is defined as follows:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service(NameEditService.NAME)
public class NameEditService extends OortService<String, Boolean> {
    public static final String NAME = "name_edit";

    public NameEditService(Oort oort) {
        super(oort, NAME);
    }

    // Lifecycle methods triggered by standard lifecycle annotations

    @PostConstruct
    public void construct() throws Exception {
        start();
    }

    @PreDestroy
    public void destroy() throws Exception {
        stop();
    }

    // CometD's listener method on channel "/service/edit"

    @org.cometd.annotation.Listener("/service/edit")
    public void editName(final ServerSession remote, final ServerMessage message) {
        // Step #1: remote client sends an action request.
        // This runs in the requesting node.

        // Find the owner Oort URL from the message.
        // Applications must implement this method with their logic.
        String ownerURL = findOwnerURL(message);

        // Prepare the action data.
        String oldName = (String)remote.getAttribute("name");
        String newName = (String)message.getDataAsMap().get("name");
        Map<String, Object> actionData = new HashMap<String, Object>();
        actionData.put("oldName", oldName);
        actionData.put("newName", newName);

        // Step #2: forward to the owner node.
        // Method forward(...) is inherited from OortService
        forward(ownerURL, actionData, new ServerContext(remote, message));
    }

    @Override
    protected Result<Boolean> onForward(Request request) {
        // Step #3: perform the action.
        // This runs in the owner node.

        try {
            Map<String, Object> actionData = request.getDataAsMap();
            // Edit the name.
            // Applications must implement this method.
            boolean result = editName(actionData);

            // Return the action result.
            return Result.success(result);
        } catch (Exception x) {
            // Return the action failure.
            return Result.failure("Could not edit name, reason: " + x.getMessage());
        }
    }

    @Override
    protected void onForwardSucceeded(Boolean result, ServerContext context) {
        // Step #4: successful result.
        // This runs in the requesting node.

        // Notify the remote client of the result of the edit.
        context.getServerSession().deliver(getLocalSession(), context.getServerMessage().getChannel(), result, Promise.noop());
    }

    @Override
    protected void onForwardFailed(Object failure, ServerContext context) {
        // Step #5: failure result.
        // This runs in the requesting node.

        // Notify the remote client of the failure.
        context.getServerSession().deliver(getLocalSession(), context.getServerMessage().getChannel(), failure, Promise.noop());
    }
}
----
====

[[_java_oort_objects_oort_service_primary]]
===== OortPrimaryService

Applications may have data entities that are naturally owned by any node.
For example, in a chat application a chat room may be created by a user in
any node, and be owned by the node the user that created it is connected to.

There are cases, however, where entities cannot be owned by any node, but
instead must be owned by one node only, usually referred to as the _primary_ node.
A typical example of such an entity is a unique (across the cluster) ID
generator that produces unique number values, or a service that accesses a
storage for archiving purposes (such as a file system or a database) that is
only available on a particular node, or a service that must perform the atomic
creation of certain entities (for example, unique user names), etc.

CometD provides `org.cometd.oort.OortPrimaryService` that can be subclasses by
applications to write services that perform actions on data entities that must
be owned by a single node only.
There is one instance of `OortPrimaryService` with the same name in each node
(like for other `OortService` instances), but only one of them is the _primary_.

CometD provides an out-of-the-box implementation of `OortPrimaryService`,
`org.cometd.oort.OortPrimaryLong`, that can be used as a unique-across-the-cluster
number generator.

The implementation of an `OortPrimaryService` subclass is similar to that of
`OortService` (see also <<_java_oort_objects_oort_service_creation,this section>>),
but this time the `forward(...)` is always called with the same Oort URL
(that of the _primary_ node) that can be obtained by calling method
`OortPrimaryService.getPrimaryOortURL()`.

Decide whether or not a node is a primary node can be done by reading system
properties passed to the command line, or via configuration files, or other
similar means.

[[_java_oort_objects_tradeoffs]]
==== OortObject and OortService TradeOffs

In general, applications can be seen as programs that create data and operate on that data.
Given a certain node, the application may need to access data stored on a remote node.
For modify/delete operations on the data, use an `OortService` and forward the action to the owner node.
The read operation, however, can be performed either using an `OortObject` or using an `OortService`.

When using an `OortObject`, you trade more memory usage for smaller latencies
to read the data, since the data is replicated to all nodes and therefore the
read operation is local and does not involve network communication.

When using an `OortService`, you trade less memory usage for bigger latencies
to read the data, since reading the data requires to forward the action to the
node that owns the data and have the owner node to send it back to the requesting node.

Whether to use one solution or the other depends heavily on the application,
the server machine specification (especially available memory), and may even
change over time.

For example, an application that is able to handle user information for a user
base of 500 users using `OortObject` may not be able to do so when it grows
to 500,000 users.
Similarly, if the nodes are colocated in the same data center connected via a
fast network, it may be worth using `OortService` (as the network time will be
negligible), but if the nodes and geographically distributed (for example, one
in America, one in Europe, one in Asia), then the network time may become an
issue and data replication through `OortObject` a better solution to minimize
latencies.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_oort_service.adoc, after:


[[_java_oort_objects_oort_service]]
==== OortService

An `org.cometd.oort.OortService` is a named CometD service (see also
xref:_java_server_services[the services section]) that forwards actions from a
_requesting_ node to the node in the cluster that owns the data onto which
the action must be performed, called the _owner_ node, and receives the
action result back.

`OortService` builds on the concept introduced by `OortObject` that the
ownership of a particular data entity belongs to one node only.
Any node can read the data entity, but only the owner can create/modify/delete it.
In order to perform actions that modify the data entity, a node has to know
what is the node that owns the data entity, and then forward the action to
the owner node. `OortService` provides the facilities to forward the action
to the owner node and receive the result of the action, or its failure.

Class `org.cometd.oort.OortService` must be subclassed by the application to
implement key methods that perform the action logic.

The typical workflow of an `OortService` is the following:

. The `OortService` receives a message from a remote client.
  The message contains enough information for the `OortService` to determine
  which node owns the data onto which the action must be applied, in the form
  of the owner node's Oort URL.
. Once the owner node Oort URL is known, the `OortService` can forward the
  action by calling method `forward(...)`, passing in action information and
  an opaque context.
  The owner node may be the node that received the message from the remote
  client itself, and applications do not need to do anything different from
  the case where the owner node is a different one.
. The action arrives to the owner node and CometD invokes method `onForward(...)`
  on the `OortService` that resides on the owner node, passing in the action
  information sent from the second step.
  Method `onForward(...)` is implemented by application to perform the custom
  logic and may return a successful result or a failure.
. The successful action result returned by `onForward(...)` is sent back by
  CometD to the requesting node, and when it arrives there, CometD invokes
  method `onForwardSucceeded(...)`, passing in the result of the action
  returned by `onForward(...)` and the opaque context passed to the `forward(...)`
  method in the second step.
  Method `onForwardSucceeded(...)` is implemented by the application.
. The action failure returned by `onForward(...)` is sent back by CometD to
  the requesting node, and when it arrives there, CometD invokes method
  `onForwardFailed(...)`, passing in the failure returned by `onForward(...)`
  and the opaque context passed to the `forward(...)` method in the second step.
  Method `onForwardFailed(...)` is implemented by the application.

[[_java_oort_objects_oort_service_creation]]
===== OortService Creation

`OortService` are uniquely named across the cluster, and are usually created
at startup by subclassing them.
Since they are CometD services, they are usually annotated to listen for messages
on certain channels (see also xref:_java_server_services_annotated[the annotated services section]
for further details on service annotations):

====
[source,java]
----
ServerAnnotationProcessor processor = ...;
Oort oort = ...;

// Create the service instance and process its annotations
NameEditService nameEditService = new NameEditService(oort);
processor.process(nameEditService);
----
====

where the `NameEditService` is defined as follows:

====
[source,java]
----
@Service(NameEditService.NAME)
public class NameEditService extends OortService<String, Boolean> {
    public static final String NAME = "name_edit";

    public NameEditService(Oort oort) {
        super(oort, NAME);
    }

    // Lifecycle methods triggered by standard lifecycle annotations

    @PostConstruct
    public void construct() throws Exception {
        start();
    }

    @PreDestroy
    public void destroy() throws Exception {
        stop();
    }

    // CometD's listener method on channel "/service/edit"

    @org.cometd.annotation.Listener("/service/edit")
    public void editName(final ServerSession remote, final ServerMessage message) {
        // Step #1: remote client sends an action request.
        // This runs in the requesting node.

        // Find the owner Oort URL from the message.
        // Applications must implement this method with their logic.
        String ownerURL = findOwnerURL(message);

        // Prepare the action data.
        String oldName = (String)remote.getAttribute("name");
        String newName = (String)message.getDataAsMap().get("name");
        Map<String, Object> actionData = new HashMap<String, Object>();
        actionData.put("oldName", oldName);
        actionData.put("newName", newName);

        // Step #2: forward to the owner node.
        // Method forward(...) is inherited from OortService
        forward(ownerURL, actionData, new ServerContext(remote, message));
    }

    @Override
    protected Result<Boolean> onForward(Request request) {
        // Step #3: perform the action.
        // This runs in the owner node.

        try {
            Map<String, Object> actionData = request.getDataAsMap();
            // Edit the name.
            // Applications must implement this method.
            boolean result = editName(actionData);

            // Return the action result.
            return Result.success(result);
        } catch (Exception x) {
            // Return the action failure.
            return Result.failure("Could not edit name, reason: " + x.getMessage());
        }
    }

    @Override
    protected void onForwardSucceeded(Boolean result, ServerContext context) {
        // Step #4: successful result.
        // This runs in the requesting node.

        // Notify the remote client of the result of the edit.
        context.getServerSession().deliver(getLocalSession(), context.getServerMessage().getChannel(), result, Promise.noop());
    }

    @Override
    protected void onForwardFailed(Object failure, ServerContext context) {
        // Step #5: failure result.
        // This runs in the requesting node.

        // Notify the remote client of the failure.
        context.getServerSession().deliver(getLocalSession(), context.getServerMessage().getChannel(), failure, Promise.noop());
    }
}
----
====

[[_java_oort_objects_oort_service_primary]]
===== OortPrimaryService

Applications may have data entities that are naturally owned by any node.
For example, in a chat application a chat room may be created by a user in
any node, and be owned by the node the user that created it is connected to.

There are cases, however, where entities cannot be owned by any node, but
instead must be owned by one node only, usually referred to as the _primary_ node.
A typical example of such an entity is a unique (across the cluster) ID
generator that produces unique number values, or a service that accesses a
storage for archiving purposes (such as a file system or a database) that is
only available on a particular node, or a service that must perform the atomic
creation of certain entities (for example, unique user names), etc.

CometD provides `org.cometd.oort.OortPrimaryService` that can be subclasses by
applications to write services that perform actions on data entities that must
be owned by a single node only.
There is one instance of `OortPrimaryService` with the same name in each node
(like for other `OortService` instances), but only one of them is the _primary_.

CometD provides an out-of-the-box implementation of `OortPrimaryService`,
`org.cometd.oort.OortPrimaryLong`, that can be used as a unique-across-the-cluster
number generator.

The implementation of an `OortPrimaryService` subclass is similar to that of
`OortService` (see also xref:_java_oort_objects_oort_service_creation[this section]),
but this time the `forward(...)` is always called with the same Oort URL
(that of the _primary_ node) that can be obtained by calling method
`OortPrimaryService.getPrimaryOortURL()`.

Decide whether or not a node is a primary node can be done by reading system
properties passed to the command line, or via configuration files, or other
similar means.

[[_java_oort_objects_tradeoffs]]
==== OortObject and OortService TradeOffs

In general, applications can be seen as programs that create data and operate on that data.
Given a certain node, the application may need to access data stored on a remote node.
For modify/delete operations on the data, use an `OortService` and forward the action to the owner node.
The read operation, however, can be performed either using an `OortObject` or using an `OortService`.

When using an `OortObject`, you trade more memory usage for smaller latencies
to read the data, since the data is replicated to all nodes and therefore the
read operation is local and does not involve network communication.

When using an `OortService`, you trade less memory usage for bigger latencies
to read the data, since reading the data requires to forward the action to the
node that owns the data and have the owner node to send it back to the requesting node.

Whether to use one solution or the other depends heavily on the application,
the server machine specification (especially available memory), and may even
change over time.

For example, an application that is able to handle user information for a user
base of 500 users using `OortObject` may not be able to do so when it grows
to 500,000 users.
Similarly, if the nodes are colocated in the same data center connected via a
fast network, it may be worth using `OortService` (as the network time will be
negligible), but if the nodes and geographically distributed (for example, one
in America, one in Europe, one in Asia), then the network time may become an
issue and data replication through `OortObject` a better solution to minimize
latencies.
