cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_transports.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_transports]]
==== Server Transports

The CometD server can send and receive Bayeux messages.
These messages may be transported to/from the CometD server using
different wire transports. The most common wire transports are HTTP
(both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2) and WebSocket.

[NOTE]
====
The CometD project borrows many libraries from the https://eclipse.org/jetty[Jetty]
project, but all the Jetty libraries required by CometD are portable across
Servlet Containers, so you can deploy your CometD web application to _any_
Servlet Container.
Servlet Containers provide HTTP and WebSocket wire transports that the CometD
server uses to send and receive Bayeux messages.
====

[[_java_server_transports_http]]
===== HTTP Server Transports

<<_bayeux,The Bayeux protocol>> defines two mandatory transports based on HTTP:
`long-polling` and `callback-polling`.
These two transports are automatically configured in the `BayeuxServer`
instance, and there is no need to explicitly specify them in the configuration.

For the `long-polling` transport there exist two implementations:

* `org.cometd.server.http.AsyncJSONTransport`, which uses Servlet 3.1
  non-blocking I/O and it is only available when the CometD web application
  is deployed to Servlet Containers that support Servlet 3.1
* `org.cometd.server.http.JSONTransport`, which depends on Servlet 3.0
  and uses blocking I/O

The CometD server tries to lookup the presence of Servlet 3.1 via reflection
on startup; if it is available, then `AsyncJSONTransport` is preferred over
`JSONTransport`, as it is more scalable in the case of a large number of
clients because it uses non-blocking I/O.

For the `callback-polling` transport the implementation class is
`org.cometd.server.http.JSONPTransport`.
This transport uses blocking I/O and it is the least efficient; the CometD
server only uses it when all other transports cannot be used.

HTTP transports may require a more advanced configuration described
in <<_java_server_configuration_advanced,this section>>.

[[_java_server_transports_websocket]]
===== WebSocket Server Transports

For the `websocket` transport there exist two implementations:

* one based on the standard Java APIs provided by
  https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=356[JSR 356]. If these APIs are available,
  CometD will use a `websocket` transport based on the standard WebSocket APIs,
  whose implementation class is named `org.cometd.server.websocket.javax.WebSocketTransport`
* one based on the Jetty WebSocket APIs, whose implementation class is named
  `org.cometd.server.websocket.jetty.JettyWebSocketTransport`.
  CometD will _not_ attempt to use this transport automatically; applications
  that want to make use of the extra features provided by this transport
  must explicitly configure it (typically along with a HTTP transport such as
  `long-polling`) using the `transports` parameter as described in
  <<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>>.

The order of preference for the server transport is:
`[websocket, long-polling, callback-polling]`.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The `websocket` _server_ transport will be enabled _only_ if your Servlet Container
supports JSR 356 and if that supports is enabled (some container may make it
optional).

It is possible to use the `websocket` _client_ transport on the server (for
example to communicate with another WebSocket CometD server) without any problem
because it is fully portable (provided you ship all the dependencies in your
web application).
For example, it is possible to have a client communicating via HTTP to a CometD
web application running in Tomcat, which communicates via WebSocket to another
CometD web application running in Jetty.
====

The CometD server tries to lookup the JSR 356 APIs via reflection on startup;
if they are available, then it creates the `websocket` transport based on the
JSR 356 APIs.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Remember that the availability of the JSR 356 APIs is not enough, you need to
make sure that your web application contains the required CometD WebSocket
dependencies.

The JSR 356 `websocket` transport requires the dependency
`org.cometd.java:cometd-java-websocket-javax-server` (and transitive dependencies).

The Jetty `websocket` transport requires the dependency
`org.cometd.java:cometd-java-websocket-jetty-server` (and transitive dependencies).
====

Including the right dependencies in your web application is very easy if you
use Maven: just declare the above dependency in your web application's `pom.xml`
file.

If you are not using Maven, you need to make sure that above dependency and its
transitive dependencies are present in the `WEB-INF/lib` directory of your web
application `.war` file.

If you have configured your web application to support cross-domain HTTP calls
(see also <<_java_server_configuration_advanced,this section>>), you do not
need to worry because the `CrossOriginFilter` is by default disabled for the
WebSocket protocol.

If you plan to use the `websocket` _client_ transport in your web application,
and you are not using Maven, make sure to read
<<_java_client_transports,the Java client transports section>>.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_transports.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_transports]]
==== Server Transports

The CometD server can send and receive Bayeux messages.
These messages may be transported to/from the CometD server using
different wire transports. The most common wire transports are HTTP
(both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2) and WebSocket.

[NOTE]
====
The CometD project borrows many libraries from the https://eclipse.org/jetty[Jetty]
project, but all the Jetty libraries required by CometD are portable across
Servlet Containers, so you can deploy your CometD web application to _any_
Servlet Container.
Servlet Containers provide HTTP and WebSocket wire transports that the CometD
server uses to send and receive Bayeux messages.
====

[[_java_server_transports_http]]
===== HTTP Server Transports

xref:_bayeux[The Bayeux protocol] defines two mandatory transports based on HTTP:
`long-polling` and `callback-polling`.
These two transports are automatically configured in the `BayeuxServer`
instance, and there is no need to explicitly specify them in the configuration.

For the `long-polling` transport there exist two implementations:

* `org.cometd.server.http.AsyncJSONTransport`, which uses Servlet 3.1
  non-blocking I/O and it is only available when the CometD web application
  is deployed to Servlet Containers that support Servlet 3.1
* `org.cometd.server.http.JSONTransport`, which depends on Servlet 3.0
  and uses blocking I/O

The CometD server tries to lookup the presence of Servlet 3.1 via reflection
on startup; if it is available, then `AsyncJSONTransport` is preferred over
`JSONTransport`, as it is more scalable in the case of a large number of
clients because it uses non-blocking I/O.

For the `callback-polling` transport the implementation class is
`org.cometd.server.http.JSONPTransport`.
This transport uses blocking I/O and it is the least efficient; the CometD
server only uses it when all other transports cannot be used.

HTTP transports may require a more advanced configuration described
in xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced[this section].

[[_java_server_transports_websocket]]
===== WebSocket Server Transports

For the `websocket` transport there exist two implementations:

* one based on the standard Java APIs provided by
  https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=356[JSR 356]. If these APIs are available,
  CometD will use a `websocket` transport based on the standard WebSocket APIs,
  whose implementation class is named `org.cometd.server.websocket.javax.WebSocketTransport`
* one based on the Jetty WebSocket APIs, whose implementation class is named
  `org.cometd.server.websocket.jetty.JettyWebSocketTransport`.
  CometD will _not_ attempt to use this transport automatically; applications
  that want to make use of the extra features provided by this transport
  must explicitly configure it (typically along with a HTTP transport such as
  `long-polling`) using the `transports` parameter as described in
  xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section].

The order of preference for the server transport is:
`[websocket, long-polling, callback-polling]`.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The `websocket` _server_ transport will be enabled _only_ if your Servlet Container
supports JSR 356 and if that supports is enabled (some container may make it
optional).

It is possible to use the `websocket` _client_ transport on the server (for
example to communicate with another WebSocket CometD server) without any problem
because it is fully portable (provided you ship all the dependencies in your
web application).
For example, it is possible to have a client communicating via HTTP to a CometD
web application running in Tomcat, which communicates via WebSocket to another
CometD web application running in Jetty.
====

The CometD server tries to lookup the JSR 356 APIs via reflection on startup;
if they are available, then it creates the `websocket` transport based on the
JSR 356 APIs.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Remember that the availability of the JSR 356 APIs is not enough, you need to
make sure that your web application contains the required CometD WebSocket
dependencies.

The JSR 356 `websocket` transport requires the dependency
`org.cometd.java:cometd-java-websocket-javax-server` (and transitive dependencies).

The Jetty `websocket` transport requires the dependency
`org.cometd.java:cometd-java-websocket-jetty-server` (and transitive dependencies).
====

Including the right dependencies in your web application is very easy if you
use Maven: just declare the above dependency in your web application's `pom.xml`
file.

If you are not using Maven, you need to make sure that above dependency and its
transitive dependencies are present in the `WEB-INF/lib` directory of your web
application `.war` file.

If you have configured your web application to support cross-domain HTTP calls
(see also xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced[this section]), you do not
need to worry because the `CrossOriginFilter` is by default disabled for the
WebSocket protocol.

If you plan to use the `websocket` _client_ transport in your web application,
and you are not using Maven, make sure to read
xref:_java_client_transports[the Java client transports section].
