cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_send.adoc, before:


[[_javascript_send]]
=== Sending Messages

CometD allows you to send messages in three ways:

. publish/subscribe: you publish a message onto a broadcast channel for
  subscribers to receive the message
. peer-to-peer: you publish a message onto a service channel for a particular
  recipient to receive the message
. remote procedure call: you remote call a target on the server to perform
  an action, and receive a response back

For the first and second case the API to use is `publish()`.
For the third case the API to use is `remoteCall()`.

CometD also allows applications to send messages that contain binary data.
This case is supported by using the `publishBinary()` and `remoteCallBinary()`
variants of the APIs.

[[_javascript_publish]]
==== Publishing

The `publish()` function allows you to publish data onto a certain channel:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.publish('/mychannel', { mydata: { foo: 'bar' } });
----
====

You cannot (and it makes no sense to) publish to a meta channel, but you can
publish to a service or broadcast channel even if you are not subscribed to that channel.
However, you have to handshake (see
<<_javascript_handshake,the handshake section>>) before you can publish.

As with other JavaScript CometD API, `publish()` involves a communication with
the server and it is asynchronous: it returns immediately, well before the Bayeux
server has received the message.

When the message you published arrives to the server, the server replies to
the client with a publish acknowledgment; this allows clients to be sure that
the message reached the server.
The publish acknowledgment arrives on the same channel the message was published
to, with the same message `id`, with a `successful` field.
If the message publish fails for any reason, for example because server cannot
be reached, then a publish failure will be emitted, similarly to a publish acknowledgment.

For historical reasons, publish acknowledgments and failures are notified on
the `/meta/publish` channel (only in the JavaScript library), even if the
`/meta/publish` channel is not part of <<_bayeux,the Bayeux protocol>>.

In order to be notified of publish acknowledgments or failures, is it recommended
that you use this variant of the `publish()` function, passing a callback function:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.publish('/mychannel', { mydata: { foo: 'bar' } }, function(publishAck) {
    if (publishAck.successful) {
        // The message reached the server
    }
});
----
====

[NOTE]
====
Calling `publish()` _does not_ mean that you have published the message
when `publish()` returns.
====

If you need to publish several messages, possibly to different channels, you might want
to use <<_javascript_batch,the javascript batch section>>.

When you publish to a broadcast channel, the server will automatically deliver
the message to all subscribers for that channel.
This is the publish/subscribe messaging style.

When you publish to a service channel, the server will receive the message but
the message journey will end on the server, and the message will not be delivered
to any remote client. The message should contain an application-specific identifier
of the recipient of the message, so that application-specific code on
the server can extract this identifier and deliver the message to that particular
recipient.
This is the peer-to-peer messaging style.

[[_javascript_publish_binary]]
==== Publishing Binary Data

You can publish binary data by using the specialized `publishBinary()` API.
A similar specialized API exists to perform
<<_javascript_rpc_binary,remote calls with binary data>>.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled as specified
in <<_extensions_binary,the binary extension section>>.

To publish binary data, you must first create or obtain a JavaScript typed array,
a `DataView` or an `ArrayBuffer`, and then use the `publishBinary()` API:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Create an ArrayBuffer.
var buffer = new ArrayBuffer(4);

// Fill it with the bytes.
var view = new DataView(buffer);
view.setUint8(0, 0xCA);
view.setUint8(1, 0xFE);
view.setUint8(2, 0xBA);
view.setUint8(3, 0xBE);

// Send it.
cometd.publishBinary('/binary', view, true, { prolog: 'java' });
----
====

In the example above, the binary data to send can be either the `buffer` or the `view`.
The third parameter to `publishBinary()` is the `last` parameter that indicates
whether the binary data is the last chunk; when omitted, it defaults to `true`.
The fourth parameter to `publishBinary()` is the `meta` parameter that associates
additional information to the binary data, and may be omitted.

Like normal `publish()` calls, you can pass as last parameter to `publishBinary()`
a function that is notified of the publish acknowledgement.

[[_javascript_rpc]]
==== Remote Calls

When you need to just call the server to perform some action, such as retrieving
data from a database, or updating some server state, you want to use a remote call:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.remoteCall('target', { foo: 'bar' }, 5000, function(response) {
    if (response.successful) {
        // The action was performed
        var data = response.data;
    }
});
----
====

The first argument of `remoteCall()` is the _target_ of the remote call.
You can think of it as a method name to invoke on the server, or you can think
of it as the action you want to perform.
It may or may not have a leading `/` character, and may be composed of multiple
segments such as `target/subtarget`.

The second argument of `remoteCall()` is an object with the arguments of the
remote call.
You can think of it as the arguments of the remote method call, reified as
an object, or you can think of it as the data needed to perform the action.

The third, optional, argument of `remoteCall()` is the timeout, in milliseconds,
for the remote call to complete. If the timeout expires, the callback function
will be invoked with a response object whose `successful` field is set to `false`,
and whose `error` field is set to `'406::timeout'`.
The default value of the timeout is the value specified by the `maxNetworkDelay`
<<_javascript_configure,parameter>>. A negative value or `0` disables the timeout.

The last argument of `remoteCall()` is the callback function invoked when
the remote call returns, or when it fails (for example due to network failures),
or when it times out.

The following table shows what response fields are present in the response object
passed to the callback, in what cases:

[cols="<8,^1a,^4,^2a"]
|===
| Case | response.successful | response.data | response.error

| Action performed successfully by the server
| `true`
| action data from the server
| N/A

| Action failed by the server +
  (for example, exception thrown)
| `false`
| failure data from the server
| N/A

| Network failure
| `false`
| N/A
| N/A

| Timeout
| `false`
| N/A
| `'406::timeout'`
|===

Internally, remote calls are translated to messages published to a service channel,
and handled on the server side by means of an
<<_java_server_services_annotated,annotated service>>, in particular one with a
`@RemoteCall` <<_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_remote_call,annotation>>.

However, remote calls are much simpler to use than service channels since the
correlation between request and response is performed by CometD, along with error
handling. In this way, application have a much simpler API to use.

[[_javascript_rpc_binary]]
==== Remote Calls with Binary Data

Similarly to <<_javascript_publish_binary,publishing binary data>>, it is possible
to send binary data when performing remote calls.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled in the client as specified
in <<_extensions_binary,the binary extension section>>.

Here is an example that sends an `ArrayBuffer`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Obtain an ArrayBuffer.
var buffer = ...;
var meta = {
    contentType: "application/pdf"
};
cometd.remoteCallBinary('target', buffer, true, meta, function(response) {
    if (response.successful) {
        // The action was performed
        var data = response.data;
    }
});
----
====

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_send.adoc, after:


[[_javascript_send]]
=== Sending Messages

CometD allows you to send messages in three ways:

. publish/subscribe: you publish a message onto a broadcast channel for
  subscribers to receive the message
. peer-to-peer: you publish a message onto a service channel for a particular
  recipient to receive the message
. remote procedure call: you remote call a target on the server to perform
  an action, and receive a response back

For the first and second case the API to use is `publish()`.
For the third case the API to use is `remoteCall()`.

CometD also allows applications to send messages that contain binary data.
This case is supported by using the `publishBinary()` and `remoteCallBinary()`
variants of the APIs.

[[_javascript_publish]]
==== Publishing

The `publish()` function allows you to publish data onto a certain channel:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.publish('/mychannel', { mydata: { foo: 'bar' } });
----
====

You cannot (and it makes no sense to) publish to a meta channel, but you can
publish to a service or broadcast channel even if you are not subscribed to that channel.
However, you have to handshake (see
xref:_javascript_handshake[the handshake section]) before you can publish.

As with other JavaScript CometD API, `publish()` involves a communication with
the server and it is asynchronous: it returns immediately, well before the Bayeux
server has received the message.

When the message you published arrives to the server, the server replies to
the client with a publish acknowledgment; this allows clients to be sure that
the message reached the server.
The publish acknowledgment arrives on the same channel the message was published
to, with the same message `id`, with a `successful` field.
If the message publish fails for any reason, for example because server cannot
be reached, then a publish failure will be emitted, similarly to a publish acknowledgment.

For historical reasons, publish acknowledgments and failures are notified on
the `/meta/publish` channel (only in the JavaScript library), even if the
`/meta/publish` channel is not part of xref:_bayeux[the Bayeux protocol].

In order to be notified of publish acknowledgments or failures, is it recommended
that you use this variant of the `publish()` function, passing a callback function:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.publish('/mychannel', { mydata: { foo: 'bar' } }, function(publishAck) {
    if (publishAck.successful) {
        // The message reached the server
    }
});
----
====

[NOTE]
====
Calling `publish()` _does not_ mean that you have published the message
when `publish()` returns.
====

If you need to publish several messages, possibly to different channels, you might want
to use xref:_javascript_batch[the javascript batch section].

When you publish to a broadcast channel, the server will automatically deliver
the message to all subscribers for that channel.
This is the publish/subscribe messaging style.

When you publish to a service channel, the server will receive the message but
the message journey will end on the server, and the message will not be delivered
to any remote client. The message should contain an application-specific identifier
of the recipient of the message, so that application-specific code on
the server can extract this identifier and deliver the message to that particular
recipient.
This is the peer-to-peer messaging style.

[[_javascript_publish_binary]]
==== Publishing Binary Data

You can publish binary data by using the specialized `publishBinary()` API.
A similar specialized API exists to perform
xref:_javascript_rpc_binary[remote calls with binary data].

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled as specified
in xref:_extensions_binary[the binary extension section].

To publish binary data, you must first create or obtain a JavaScript typed array,
a `DataView` or an `ArrayBuffer`, and then use the `publishBinary()` API:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Create an ArrayBuffer.
var buffer = new ArrayBuffer(4);

// Fill it with the bytes.
var view = new DataView(buffer);
view.setUint8(0, 0xCA);
view.setUint8(1, 0xFE);
view.setUint8(2, 0xBA);
view.setUint8(3, 0xBE);

// Send it.
cometd.publishBinary('/binary', view, true, { prolog: 'java' });
----
====

In the example above, the binary data to send can be either the `buffer` or the `view`.
The third parameter to `publishBinary()` is the `last` parameter that indicates
whether the binary data is the last chunk; when omitted, it defaults to `true`.
The fourth parameter to `publishBinary()` is the `meta` parameter that associates
additional information to the binary data, and may be omitted.

Like normal `publish()` calls, you can pass as last parameter to `publishBinary()`
a function that is notified of the publish acknowledgement.

[[_javascript_rpc]]
==== Remote Calls

When you need to just call the server to perform some action, such as retrieving
data from a database, or updating some server state, you want to use a remote call:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.remoteCall('target', { foo: 'bar' }, 5000, function(response) {
    if (response.successful) {
        // The action was performed
        var data = response.data;
    }
});
----
====

The first argument of `remoteCall()` is the _target_ of the remote call.
You can think of it as a method name to invoke on the server, or you can think
of it as the action you want to perform.
It may or may not have a leading `/` character, and may be composed of multiple
segments such as `target/subtarget`.

The second argument of `remoteCall()` is an object with the arguments of the
remote call.
You can think of it as the arguments of the remote method call, reified as
an object, or you can think of it as the data needed to perform the action.

The third, optional, argument of `remoteCall()` is the timeout, in milliseconds,
for the remote call to complete. If the timeout expires, the callback function
will be invoked with a response object whose `successful` field is set to `false`,
and whose `error` field is set to `'406::timeout'`.
The default value of the timeout is the value specified by the `maxNetworkDelay`
xref:_javascript_configure[parameter]. A negative value or `0` disables the timeout.

The last argument of `remoteCall()` is the callback function invoked when
the remote call returns, or when it fails (for example due to network failures),
or when it times out.

The following table shows what response fields are present in the response object
passed to the callback, in what cases:

[cols="<8,^1a,^4,^2a"]
|===
| Case | response.successful | response.data | response.error

| Action performed successfully by the server
| `true`
| action data from the server
| N/A

| Action failed by the server +
  (for example, exception thrown)
| `false`
| failure data from the server
| N/A

| Network failure
| `false`
| N/A
| N/A

| Timeout
| `false`
| N/A
| `'406::timeout'`
|===

Internally, remote calls are translated to messages published to a service channel,
and handled on the server side by means of an
xref:_java_server_services_annotated[annotated service], in particular one with a
`@RemoteCall` xref:_java_server_services_annotated_server_side_remote_call[annotation].

However, remote calls are much simpler to use than service channels since the
correlation between request and response is performed by CometD, along with error
handling. In this way, application have a much simpler API to use.

[[_javascript_rpc_binary]]
==== Remote Calls with Binary Data

Similarly to xref:_javascript_publish_binary[publishing binary data], it is possible
to send binary data when performing remote calls.

Remember that you must have the binary extension enabled in the client as specified
in xref:_extensions_binary[the binary extension section].

Here is an example that sends an `ArrayBuffer`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Obtain an ArrayBuffer.
var buffer = ...;
var meta = {
    contentType: "application/pdf"
};
cometd.remoteCallBinary('target', buffer, true, meta, function(response) {
    if (response.successful) {
        // The action was performed
        var data = response.data;
    }
});
----
====
