cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_subscribe.adoc, before:


[[_javascript_subscribe]]
=== Subscribing and Unsubscribing

The following sections provide information about subscribing and unsubscribing
with the JavaScript library.

Depending on the type of channel, subscribing and unsubscribing to a channel
have different meanings.
Refer to <<_concepts_channels,the channels concept section>> for the channel
type definitions.

[[_javascript_subscribe_meta_channels]]
==== Meta Channels

It is not possible to subscribe to meta channels: the server replies with an error message.
It is possible to listen to meta channels (see
<<_javascript_subscribe_vs_listen,this section>> for an explanation of the difference
between subscribers and listeners). You cannot (and it makes no sense to) publish messages
to meta channels: only the Bayeux protocol implementation creates and sends messages on meta channels.
Meta channels are useful on the client to listen for error messages like handshake
errors (for example, because the client did not provide the correct credentials)
or network errors (for example, to know when the connection with the server has
broken or when it has been re-established).

[[_javascript_subscribe_service_channels]]
==== Service Channels

Service channels are used in the case of request/response style of communication
between client and server (as opposed to the publish/subscribe style of communication
on broadcast channels). While subscribing to service channels yields no errors,
this is a no-operation for the server: the server ignores the subscription request.
It is possible to publish to service channels, with the semantic of a communication
between a specific client (the one that is publishing the message on the service
channel) and the server.
Service channels are useful to implement, for example, private chat messages: in a
chat with userA, userB and userC, userA can publish a private message to userC
(without userB knowing about it) using service channels.

[[_javascript_subscribe_broadcast_channels]]
==== Broadcast Channels

Broadcast channels have the semantic of a messaging topic and are used in the case
of publish/subscribe style of communication.
Usually, it is possible to subscribe to broadcast channels and to publish to
broadcast channels; this can only be forbidden using a security policy on the Bayeux
server (see also <<_java_server_authorization,the java server authorization section>>) or
by using authorizers (see also <<_java_server_authorizers,the authorizers section>>).
Broadcast channels are useful to broadcast messages to all subscribed clients, for
example in case of a stock price change.

[[_javascript_subscribe_vs_listen]]
==== Subscribers versus Listeners

The JavaScript CometD API has two APIs to work with channel subscriptions:

. `addListener()` and the correspondent `removeListener()`
. `subscribe()` and the correspondent `unsubscribe()`

The `addListener()` function:

* Must be used to listen to meta channel messages.
* May be used to listen to service channel messages.
* Should not be used to listen broadcast channel messages (use `subscribe()` instead).
* Does not involve any communication with the Bayeux server, and as such can be
  called before calling `handshake().`
* Is synchronous: when it returns, you are guaranteed that the listener has been added.

The `subscribe()` function:

* Must not be used to listen to meta channels messages (if attempted, the server returns an error).
* May be used to listen to service channel messages.
* Should be used to listen to broadcast channel messages.
* Involves a communication with the Bayeux server and as such cannot be called before calling `handshake().`
* Is asynchronous: it returns immediately, well before the Bayeux server has received the subscription request.

[NOTE]
====
Calling `subscribe()` _does not_ mean that you have completed the subscription
with the server when function returns.
====

If you want to be certain that the server received your subscription request
(or not), you can either register a `/meta/subscribe` listener, or pass a callback
function to `subscribe()`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.subscribe('/foo', function(message) { ... }, function(subscribeReply) {
    if (subscribeReply.successful) {
        // The server successfully subscribed this client to the "/foo" channel.
    }
});
----
====

Remember that subscriptions may fail on the server (for example, the client does
not have enough permissions to subscribe) or on the client (for example, there
is a network failure). In both cases `/meta/subscribe` listener, or the callback
function, will be invoked with an unsuccessful subscribe message reply.

You can pass additional information to the subscribe message by passing an
additional object to the `subscribe()` function:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var additional = {
    com.acme.priority: 10
};
cometd.subscribe('/foo', function(message) { ... }, additional, function(subscribeReply) {
    // Your logic here.
});
----
====

Remember that the subscribe message is sent to the server only when subscribing
to a channel for the first time.
Additional subscriptions to the same channel will not result in a message being
sent to the server.
See also <<_javascript_handshake,the javascript handshake section>> for further
information about passing additional objects.

Both `addListener()` and `subscribe()` return a subscription object that is
opaque to applications (that is, applications should not try to use the fields
of this object since its format may vary across CometD releases).

The returned subscription object should be passed to, respectively,
`removeListener()` and `unsubscribe()`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Some initialization code
var subscription1 = cometd.addListener('/meta/connect', function() { ... });
var subscription2 = cometd.subscribe('/foo/bar/', function() { ... });

// Some de-initialization code
cometd.unsubscribe(subscription2);
cometd.removeListener(subscription1);
----
====

Function `unsubscribe()` can too take an additional object and a callback
function as parameters:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Some initialization code
var subscription1 = cometd.subscribe('/foo/bar/', function() { ... });

// Some de-initialization code
var additional = {
    com.acme.discard: true
}
cometd.unsubscribe(subscription1, additional, function(unsubscribeReply) {
    // Your logic here.
});
----
====

Similarly to `subscribe()`, the unsubscribe message is sent to the server only
when unsubscribing from a channel for the last time.
See also <<_javascript_handshake,the javascript handshake section>> for further
information about passing additional objects.

The major difference between listeners and subscribers is that subscribers are
automatically removed upon re-handshake, while listeners are not modified by a
re-handshake.
When a client subscribes to a channel, the server maintains a client-specific
server-side subscription state.
If the server requires a re-handshake, it means that it lost the state for that
client, and therefore also the server-side subscription state.
In order to maintain the client-side state consistent with that of the server,
subscriptions – but not listeners – are automatically removed upon re-handshake.

A good place in the code to perform subscriptions is in a `/meta/handshake` function.
Since `/meta/handshake` listeners are invoked in both explicit handshakes the
client performs and in re-handshakes the server triggers, it is guaranteed that
your subscriptions are always performed properly and kept consistent with the server state.

Equivalently, a callback function passed to the `handshake()` function behaves exactly
like a `/meta/handshake` listener, and therefore can be used to perform subscriptions.

Applications do not need to unsubscribe in case of re-handshake; the CometD library
takes care of removing all subscriptions upon re-handshake, so that when the
`/meta/handshake` function executes again the subscriptions are correctly restored
(and not duplicated).

For the same reason, you should never add listeners inside a `/meta/handshake`
function, because this will add another listener without removing the previous
one, resulting in multiple notifications of the same messages.

====
[source,javascript]
----
var _reportListener;
cometd.addListener('/meta/handshake', function(message) {
    // Only subscribe if the handshake is successful
    if (message.successful) {
        // Batch all subscriptions together
        cometd.batch(function() {
            // Correct to subscribe to broadcast channels
            cometd.subscribe('/members', function(m) { ... });

            // Correct to subscribe to service channels
            cometd.subscribe('/service/status', function(m) { ... });

            // Messy to add listeners after removal, prefer using cometd.subscribe(...)
            if (_reportListener) {
                cometd.removeListener(_reportListener);
                _reportListener = cometd.addListener('/service/report', function(m) { ... });
            }

            // Wrong to add listeners without removal
            cometd.addListener('/service/notification', function(m) { ... });
        });
    }
});
----
====

In cases where the Bayeux server is not reachable (due to network failures or
because the server crashed), `subscribe()` and `unsubscribe()` behave as follows:

* In `subscribe()` CometD first adds the local listener to the list of subscribers
  for that channel, then attempts the server communication.
  If the communication fails, the server does not know that it has to send messages
  to this client and therefore on the client, the local listener (although present)
  is never invoked.
* In `unsubscribe()`, CometD first removes the local listener from the list of
  subscribers for that channel, then attempts the server communication.
  If the communication fails, the server still sends the message to the client,
  but there is no local listener to dispatch to.

[[_javascript_subscribe_resubscribe]]
==== Dynamic Resubscription

Often times, applications need to perform dynamic subscriptions and unsubscriptions,
for example when a user clicks on a user interface element, you want to subscribe to
a certain channel.
In this case the subscription object returned upon subscription is stored to be able
to dynamically unsubscribe from the channel upon user demand:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var _subscription;
function Controller() {
    this.dynamicSubscribe = function() {
       _subscription = cometd.subscribe('/dynamic', this.onEvent);
    };

    this.onEvent = function(message) {
        ...
    };

    this.dynamicUnsubscribe = function() {
        if (_subscription) {
            cometd.unsubscribe(_subscription);
            _subscription = undefined;
        }
    }
}
----
====

In case of a re-handshake, dynamic subscriptions are cleared (like any other
subscription) and the application needs to figure out which dynamic subscription
must be performed again.
This information is already known to CometD at the moment `cometd.subscribe(...)`
was called (above in function `dynamicSubscribe()`), so applications can just call
`resubscribe()` using the subscription object obtained from `subscribe()`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.addListener('/meta/handshake', function(message) {
    if (message.successful) {
        cometd.batch(function() {
            // Static subscription, no need to remember the subscription handle
            cometd.subscribe('/static', staticFunction);

            // Dynamic re-subscription
            if (_subscription) {
                _subscription = cometd.resubscribe(_subscription);
            }
        });
    }
});
----
====

[[_javascript_subscribe_exception_handling]]
==== Listeners and Subscribers Exception Handling

If a listener or subscriber function throws an exception (for example, calls a
function on an undefined object), the error message is logged at level "debug".
However, there is a way to intercept these errors by defining the global listener
exception handler that is invoked every time a listener or subscriber throws an exception:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.onListenerException = function(exception, subscriptionHandle, isListener, message) {
    // Uh-oh, something went wrong, disable this listener/subscriber
    // Object "this" points to the CometD object
    if (isListener) {
        this.removeListener(subscriptionHandle);
    } else {
        this.unsubscribe(subscriptionHandle);
    }
}
----
====

It is possible to send messages to the server from the listener exception handler.
If the listener exception handler itself throws an exception, this exception is
logged at level "info" and the CometD implementation does not break.
Notice that a similar mechanism exists for extensions, see also <<_extensions,the extensions section>>.

[[_javascript_subscribe_wildcard]]
==== Wildcard Subscriptions

It is possible to subscribe to several channels simultaneously using wildcards:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.subscribe("/chatrooms/*", function(message) { ... });
----
====

A single asterisk has the meaning of matching a single channel segment; in the
example above it matches channels `/chatrooms/12` and `/chatrooms/15`, but not
`/chatrooms/12/upload`.
To match multiple channel segments, use the double asterisk:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.subscribe("/events/**", function(message) { ... });
----
====

With the double asterisk, the channels `/events/stock/FOO` and `/events/forex/EUR`
match, as well as `/events/feed` and `/events/feed/2009/08/03`.

The wildcard mechanism works also for listeners, so it is possible to listen to
all meta channels as follows:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.addListener("/meta/*", function(message) { ... });
----
====

By default, subscriptions to the global wildcards `+/*+` and `+/**+` result in an
error, but you can change this behavior by specifying a custom security policy
on the Bayeux server.

[[_javascript_meta_channels]]
==== Meta Channel List

These are the meta channels available in the JavaScript CometD implementation:

* /meta/handshake
* /meta/connect
* /meta/disconnect
* /meta/subscribe
* /meta/unsubscribe
* /meta/publish
* /meta/unsuccessful

Each meta channel is notified when the JavaScript CometD implementation handles
the correspondent Bayeux message.
The `/meta/unsuccessful` channel is notified in case of any failure.

By far the most interesting meta channel to subscribe to is `/meta/connect`
because it gives the status of the current connection with the Bayeux server.
In combination with `/meta/disconnect`, you can use it, for example, to display
a green _connected_ icon or a red _disconnected_ icon on the page, depending on
the connection status with the Bayeux server.

Here is a common pattern using the `/meta/connect` and `/meta/disconnect` channels:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var _connected = false;

cometd.addListener('/meta/connect', function(message) {
    if (cometd.isDisconnected()) {
        return;
    }

    var wasConnected = _connected;
    _connected = message.successful;
    if (!wasConnected && _connected) {
        // Reconnected
    } else if (wasConnected && !_connected) {
        // Disconnected
    }
});

cometd.addListener('/meta/disconnect', function(message) {
    if (message.successful) {
        _connected = false;
    }
}
----
====

One small caveat with the `/meta/connect` channel is that `/meta/connect`
is also used for polling the server.
Therefore, if a disconnect is issued during an active poll, the server
returns the active poll and this triggers the `/meta/connect` listener.
The initial check on the status verifies that is not the case before
executing the connection logic.

Another interesting use of meta channels is when there is an authentication
step during the handshake.
In this case the registration to the `/meta/handshake` channel can give
details about, for example, authentication failures.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/javascript_subscribe.adoc, after:


[[_javascript_subscribe]]
=== Subscribing and Unsubscribing

The following sections provide information about subscribing and unsubscribing
with the JavaScript library.

Depending on the type of channel, subscribing and unsubscribing to a channel
have different meanings.
Refer to xref:_concepts_channels[the channels concept section] for the channel
type definitions.

[[_javascript_subscribe_meta_channels]]
==== Meta Channels

It is not possible to subscribe to meta channels: the server replies with an error message.
It is possible to listen to meta channels (see
xref:_javascript_subscribe_vs_listen[this section] for an explanation of the difference
between subscribers and listeners). You cannot (and it makes no sense to) publish messages
to meta channels: only the Bayeux protocol implementation creates and sends messages on meta channels.
Meta channels are useful on the client to listen for error messages like handshake
errors (for example, because the client did not provide the correct credentials)
or network errors (for example, to know when the connection with the server has
broken or when it has been re-established).

[[_javascript_subscribe_service_channels]]
==== Service Channels

Service channels are used in the case of request/response style of communication
between client and server (as opposed to the publish/subscribe style of communication
on broadcast channels). While subscribing to service channels yields no errors,
this is a no-operation for the server: the server ignores the subscription request.
It is possible to publish to service channels, with the semantic of a communication
between a specific client (the one that is publishing the message on the service
channel) and the server.
Service channels are useful to implement, for example, private chat messages: in a
chat with userA, userB and userC, userA can publish a private message to userC
(without userB knowing about it) using service channels.

[[_javascript_subscribe_broadcast_channels]]
==== Broadcast Channels

Broadcast channels have the semantic of a messaging topic and are used in the case
of publish/subscribe style of communication.
Usually, it is possible to subscribe to broadcast channels and to publish to
broadcast channels; this can only be forbidden using a security policy on the Bayeux
server (see also xref:_java_server_authorization[the java server authorization section]) or
by using authorizers (see also xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section]).
Broadcast channels are useful to broadcast messages to all subscribed clients, for
example in case of a stock price change.

[[_javascript_subscribe_vs_listen]]
==== Subscribers versus Listeners

The JavaScript CometD API has two APIs to work with channel subscriptions:

. `addListener()` and the correspondent `removeListener()`
. `subscribe()` and the correspondent `unsubscribe()`

The `addListener()` function:

* Must be used to listen to meta channel messages.
* May be used to listen to service channel messages.
* Should not be used to listen broadcast channel messages (use `subscribe()` instead).
* Does not involve any communication with the Bayeux server, and as such can be
  called before calling `handshake().`
* Is synchronous: when it returns, you are guaranteed that the listener has been added.

The `subscribe()` function:

* Must not be used to listen to meta channels messages (if attempted, the server returns an error).
* May be used to listen to service channel messages.
* Should be used to listen to broadcast channel messages.
* Involves a communication with the Bayeux server and as such cannot be called before calling `handshake().`
* Is asynchronous: it returns immediately, well before the Bayeux server has received the subscription request.

[NOTE]
====
Calling `subscribe()` _does not_ mean that you have completed the subscription
with the server when function returns.
====

If you want to be certain that the server received your subscription request
(or not), you can either register a `/meta/subscribe` listener, or pass a callback
function to `subscribe()`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.subscribe('/foo', function(message) { ... }, function(subscribeReply) {
    if (subscribeReply.successful) {
        // The server successfully subscribed this client to the "/foo" channel.
    }
});
----
====

Remember that subscriptions may fail on the server (for example, the client does
not have enough permissions to subscribe) or on the client (for example, there
is a network failure). In both cases `/meta/subscribe` listener, or the callback
function, will be invoked with an unsuccessful subscribe message reply.

You can pass additional information to the subscribe message by passing an
additional object to the `subscribe()` function:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var additional = {
    com.acme.priority: 10
};
cometd.subscribe('/foo', function(message) { ... }, additional, function(subscribeReply) {
    // Your logic here.
});
----
====

Remember that the subscribe message is sent to the server only when subscribing
to a channel for the first time.
Additional subscriptions to the same channel will not result in a message being
sent to the server.
See also xref:_javascript_handshake[the javascript handshake section] for further
information about passing additional objects.

Both `addListener()` and `subscribe()` return a subscription object that is
opaque to applications (that is, applications should not try to use the fields
of this object since its format may vary across CometD releases).

The returned subscription object should be passed to, respectively,
`removeListener()` and `unsubscribe()`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Some initialization code
var subscription1 = cometd.addListener('/meta/connect', function() { ... });
var subscription2 = cometd.subscribe('/foo/bar/', function() { ... });

// Some de-initialization code
cometd.unsubscribe(subscription2);
cometd.removeListener(subscription1);
----
====

Function `unsubscribe()` can too take an additional object and a callback
function as parameters:

====
[source,javascript]
----
// Some initialization code
var subscription1 = cometd.subscribe('/foo/bar/', function() { ... });

// Some de-initialization code
var additional = {
    com.acme.discard: true
}
cometd.unsubscribe(subscription1, additional, function(unsubscribeReply) {
    // Your logic here.
});
----
====

Similarly to `subscribe()`, the unsubscribe message is sent to the server only
when unsubscribing from a channel for the last time.
See also xref:_javascript_handshake[the javascript handshake section] for further
information about passing additional objects.

The major difference between listeners and subscribers is that subscribers are
automatically removed upon re-handshake, while listeners are not modified by a
re-handshake.
When a client subscribes to a channel, the server maintains a client-specific
server-side subscription state.
If the server requires a re-handshake, it means that it lost the state for that
client, and therefore also the server-side subscription state.
In order to maintain the client-side state consistent with that of the server,
subscriptions – but not listeners – are automatically removed upon re-handshake.

A good place in the code to perform subscriptions is in a `/meta/handshake` function.
Since `/meta/handshake` listeners are invoked in both explicit handshakes the
client performs and in re-handshakes the server triggers, it is guaranteed that
your subscriptions are always performed properly and kept consistent with the server state.

Equivalently, a callback function passed to the `handshake()` function behaves exactly
like a `/meta/handshake` listener, and therefore can be used to perform subscriptions.

Applications do not need to unsubscribe in case of re-handshake; the CometD library
takes care of removing all subscriptions upon re-handshake, so that when the
`/meta/handshake` function executes again the subscriptions are correctly restored
(and not duplicated).

For the same reason, you should never add listeners inside a `/meta/handshake`
function, because this will add another listener without removing the previous
one, resulting in multiple notifications of the same messages.

====
[source,javascript]
----
var _reportListener;
cometd.addListener('/meta/handshake', function(message) {
    // Only subscribe if the handshake is successful
    if (message.successful) {
        // Batch all subscriptions together
        cometd.batch(function() {
            // Correct to subscribe to broadcast channels
            cometd.subscribe('/members', function(m) { ... });

            // Correct to subscribe to service channels
            cometd.subscribe('/service/status', function(m) { ... });

            // Messy to add listeners after removal, prefer using cometd.subscribe(...)
            if (_reportListener) {
                cometd.removeListener(_reportListener);
                _reportListener = cometd.addListener('/service/report', function(m) { ... });
            }

            // Wrong to add listeners without removal
            cometd.addListener('/service/notification', function(m) { ... });
        });
    }
});
----
====

In cases where the Bayeux server is not reachable (due to network failures or
because the server crashed), `subscribe()` and `unsubscribe()` behave as follows:

* In `subscribe()` CometD first adds the local listener to the list of subscribers
  for that channel, then attempts the server communication.
  If the communication fails, the server does not know that it has to send messages
  to this client and therefore on the client, the local listener (although present)
  is never invoked.
* In `unsubscribe()`, CometD first removes the local listener from the list of
  subscribers for that channel, then attempts the server communication.
  If the communication fails, the server still sends the message to the client,
  but there is no local listener to dispatch to.

[[_javascript_subscribe_resubscribe]]
==== Dynamic Resubscription

Often times, applications need to perform dynamic subscriptions and unsubscriptions,
for example when a user clicks on a user interface element, you want to subscribe to
a certain channel.
In this case the subscription object returned upon subscription is stored to be able
to dynamically unsubscribe from the channel upon user demand:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var _subscription;
function Controller() {
    this.dynamicSubscribe = function() {
       _subscription = cometd.subscribe('/dynamic', this.onEvent);
    };

    this.onEvent = function(message) {
        ...
    };

    this.dynamicUnsubscribe = function() {
        if (_subscription) {
            cometd.unsubscribe(_subscription);
            _subscription = undefined;
        }
    }
}
----
====

In case of a re-handshake, dynamic subscriptions are cleared (like any other
subscription) and the application needs to figure out which dynamic subscription
must be performed again.
This information is already known to CometD at the moment `cometd.subscribe(...)`
was called (above in function `dynamicSubscribe()`), so applications can just call
`resubscribe()` using the subscription object obtained from `subscribe()`:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.addListener('/meta/handshake', function(message) {
    if (message.successful) {
        cometd.batch(function() {
            // Static subscription, no need to remember the subscription handle
            cometd.subscribe('/static', staticFunction);

            // Dynamic re-subscription
            if (_subscription) {
                _subscription = cometd.resubscribe(_subscription);
            }
        });
    }
});
----
====

[[_javascript_subscribe_exception_handling]]
==== Listeners and Subscribers Exception Handling

If a listener or subscriber function throws an exception (for example, calls a
function on an undefined object), the error message is logged at level "debug".
However, there is a way to intercept these errors by defining the global listener
exception handler that is invoked every time a listener or subscriber throws an exception:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.onListenerException = function(exception, subscriptionHandle, isListener, message) {
    // Uh-oh, something went wrong, disable this listener/subscriber
    // Object "this" points to the CometD object
    if (isListener) {
        this.removeListener(subscriptionHandle);
    } else {
        this.unsubscribe(subscriptionHandle);
    }
}
----
====

It is possible to send messages to the server from the listener exception handler.
If the listener exception handler itself throws an exception, this exception is
logged at level "info" and the CometD implementation does not break.
Notice that a similar mechanism exists for extensions, see also xref:_extensions[the extensions section].

[[_javascript_subscribe_wildcard]]
==== Wildcard Subscriptions

It is possible to subscribe to several channels simultaneously using wildcards:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.subscribe("/chatrooms/*", function(message) { ... });
----
====

A single asterisk has the meaning of matching a single channel segment; in the
example above it matches channels `/chatrooms/12` and `/chatrooms/15`, but not
`/chatrooms/12/upload`.
To match multiple channel segments, use the double asterisk:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.subscribe("/events/**", function(message) { ... });
----
====

With the double asterisk, the channels `/events/stock/FOO` and `/events/forex/EUR`
match, as well as `/events/feed` and `/events/feed/2009/08/03`.

The wildcard mechanism works also for listeners, so it is possible to listen to
all meta channels as follows:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.addListener("/meta/*", function(message) { ... });
----
====

By default, subscriptions to the global wildcards `+/*+` and `+/**+` result in an
error, but you can change this behavior by specifying a custom security policy
on the Bayeux server.

[[_javascript_meta_channels]]
==== Meta Channel List

These are the meta channels available in the JavaScript CometD implementation:

* /meta/handshake
* /meta/connect
* /meta/disconnect
* /meta/subscribe
* /meta/unsubscribe
* /meta/publish
* /meta/unsuccessful

Each meta channel is notified when the JavaScript CometD implementation handles
the correspondent Bayeux message.
The `/meta/unsuccessful` channel is notified in case of any failure.

By far the most interesting meta channel to subscribe to is `/meta/connect`
because it gives the status of the current connection with the Bayeux server.
In combination with `/meta/disconnect`, you can use it, for example, to display
a green _connected_ icon or a red _disconnected_ icon on the page, depending on
the connection status with the Bayeux server.

Here is a common pattern using the `/meta/connect` and `/meta/disconnect` channels:

====
[source,javascript]
----
var _connected = false;

cometd.addListener('/meta/connect', function(message) {
    if (cometd.isDisconnected()) {
        return;
    }

    var wasConnected = _connected;
    _connected = message.successful;
    if (!wasConnected && _connected) {
        // Reconnected
    } else if (wasConnected && !_connected) {
        // Disconnected
    }
});

cometd.addListener('/meta/disconnect', function(message) {
    if (message.successful) {
        _connected = false;
    }
}
----
====

One small caveat with the `/meta/connect` channel is that `/meta/connect`
is also used for polling the server.
Therefore, if a disconnect is issued during an active poll, the server
returns the active poll and this triggers the `/meta/connect` listener.
The initial check on the status verifies that is not the case before
executing the connection logic.

Another interesting use of meta channels is when there is an authentication
step during the handshake.
In this case the registration to the `/meta/handshake` channel can give
details about, for example, authentication failures.
