cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_context.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_context]]
==== Contextual Information

Server-side components such as services (see also <<_java_server_services,the services section>>),
extensions (see also <<_extensions,the extensions section>>) or authorizers (see also
<<_java_server_authorizers,the authorizers section>>) may need to access contextual
information, that is information provided by the Servlet environment such as
request attributes, HTTP session attributes, servlet context attributes or
network address information.

While the Servlet model can easily provide such information, CometD can use
also non-HTTP transports such as WebSocket that may not have such information
readily available.
CometD abstracts the retrieval of contextual information for any transport via
the `org.cometd.bayeux.server.BayeuxContext` class.

An instance of `BayeuxContext` can be obtained from a `ServerMessage` instance:

====
[source,java]
----
public void yourMethod(ServerMessage message) {
    BayeuxContext context = message.getBayeuxContext();
    ...
}
----
====

A typical usage in a `SecurityPolicy` (see also
<<_java_server_authorization,the authorization section>>) is the following:

====
[source,java]
----
public class OneClientPerAddressSecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    private final Set<String> addresses = new HashSet<>();

    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer bayeuxServer, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        BayeuxContext context = message.getBayeuxContext();

        // Get the remote address of the client
        String remoteAddress = context.getRemoteAddress().getHostString();

        // Only allow clients from different remote addresses

        boolean notPresent = addresses.add(remoteAddress);

        // Avoid to leak addresses
        session.addListener(new ServerSession.RemoveListener() {
            public void removed(ServerSession session, boolean timeout) {
                addresses.remove(remoteAddress);
            }
        });

        promise.succeed(notPresent ? true : false);
    }
}
----
====

Refer to the {javadocs}[Javadoc documentation]
for further information about methods available in `BayeuxContext`.

It is recommended to always call `ServerMessage.getBayeuxContext()` to obtain the
`BayeuxContext` instance; it should never be cached and then reused across messages.
This allows maximum portability of your code in case you're using a mix of
WebSocket and HTTP transports.

===== HTTP Contextual Information

For pure HTTP transports such as `long-polling` and `callback-polling`, there
is a direct link between the information contained in the `BayeuxContext`
and the current HTTP request that carried the Bayeux message.

For these transports, the `BayeuxContext` is created anew for every HTTP request.

===== WebSocket Contextual Information

For the WebSocket transport, the `BayeuxContext` instance is created only once
per connection, during the upgrade from HTTP to WebSocket.
The information contained in the HTTP upgrade request is copied into the
`BayeuxContext` instance and never updated again, since after the upgrade the
protocol is WebSocket, and the HTTP contextual information is not available anymore.

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_context.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_context]]
==== Contextual Information

Server-side components such as services (see also xref:_java_server_services,the services section>>)[extensions (see also <<_extensions,the extensions section]) or authorizers (see also
xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section]) may need to access contextual
information, that is information provided by the Servlet environment such as
request attributes, HTTP session attributes, servlet context attributes or
network address information.

While the Servlet model can easily provide such information, CometD can use
also non-HTTP transports such as WebSocket that may not have such information
readily available.
CometD abstracts the retrieval of contextual information for any transport via
the `org.cometd.bayeux.server.BayeuxContext` class.

An instance of `BayeuxContext` can be obtained from a `ServerMessage` instance:

====
[source,java]
----
public void yourMethod(ServerMessage message) {
    BayeuxContext context = message.getBayeuxContext();
    ...
}
----
====

A typical usage in a `SecurityPolicy` (see also
xref:_java_server_authorization[the authorization section]) is the following:

====
[source,java]
----
public class OneClientPerAddressSecurityPolicy extends DefaultSecurityPolicy {
    private final Set<String> addresses = new HashSet<>();

    @Override
    public void canHandshake(BayeuxServer bayeuxServer, ServerSession session, ServerMessage message, Promise<Boolean> promise) {
        BayeuxContext context = message.getBayeuxContext();

        // Get the remote address of the client
        String remoteAddress = context.getRemoteAddress().getHostString();

        // Only allow clients from different remote addresses

        boolean notPresent = addresses.add(remoteAddress);

        // Avoid to leak addresses
        session.addListener(new ServerSession.RemoveListener() {
            public void removed(ServerSession session, boolean timeout) {
                addresses.remove(remoteAddress);
            }
        });

        promise.succeed(notPresent ? true : false);
    }
}
----
====

Refer to the {javadocs}[Javadoc documentation]
for further information about methods available in `BayeuxContext`.

It is recommended to always call `ServerMessage.getBayeuxContext()` to obtain the
`BayeuxContext` instance; it should never be cached and then reused across messages.
This allows maximum portability of your code in case you're using a mix of
WebSocket and HTTP transports.

===== HTTP Contextual Information

For pure HTTP transports such as `long-polling` and `callback-polling`, there
is a direct link between the information contained in the `BayeuxContext`
and the current HTTP request that carried the Bayeux message.

For these transports, the `BayeuxContext` is created anew for every HTTP request.

===== WebSocket Contextual Information

For the WebSocket transport, the `BayeuxContext` instance is created only once
per connection, during the upgrade from HTTP to WebSocket.
The information contained in the HTTP upgrade request is copied into the
`BayeuxContext` instance and never updated again, since after the upgrade the
protocol is WebSocket, and the HTTP contextual information is not available anymore.
