cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_configuration.adoc, before:


[[_java_server_configuration]]
==== Configuring the Java Server

You can specify `BayeuxServer` parameters and server transport parameters in `web.xml` as init parameters of the `org.cometd.server.CometDServlet`.
If the CometD servlet creates the `BayeuxServer` instance, the servlet init parameters are passed to the `BayeuxServer` instance, which in turn configures the server transports.

If you followed xref:_primer[the primer], Maven has configured the `web.xml` file for you; here are details its configuration, a sample `web.xml`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
    <init-param>
      <param-name>timeout</param-name>
      <param-value>60000</param-value>
    </init-param>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported>
  </servlet>
  <servlet-mapping>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

You must define and map the `org.cometd.server.CometDServlet` in `web.xml` to enable the server to interpret the Bayeux protocol.
It is normally mapped to `+/cometd/*+`, but you can change the `url-pattern` mapping if you prefer, or even have multiple mappings.

[[_java_server_configuration_bayeux]]
==== Configuring `BayeuxServer`

Here is the list of configuration init parameters that the `BayeuxServer` implementation accepts:

.`BayeuxServer` Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| allowedTransports
| ""
| A comma-separated list of `ServerTransport` names allowed.
  If not specified, the default server transports are allowed.

| broadcastToPublisher
| true
| When a publisher is also subscribed to the channel it publishes a message to, this parameter controls whether `BayeuxServer` should broadcast the message to all subscribers (including the publisher), or only to the other subscribers.
  This property can be overridden at the channel level and at the session level.

| jsonContext
| `org.cometd.server.JettyJSONContextServer`
| The full qualified name of a class implementing `org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer`.
  The class is loaded and instantiated using the default constructor.

| transports
| ""
| A comma-separated list of `ServerTransport` implementation class names (that take a `org.cometd.server.BayeuxServerImpl` as only constructor parameter) that define the server transports.

| validateMessageFields
| true
| Whether message fields such as `channel`, `id` and `subscription` should be validated to contain legal characters as defined in xref:_bayeux_protocol_elements[the Bayeux specification].

| sweepPeriod
| 997
| The period, in milliseconds, of the sweeping activity performed by the server.

|===

[[_java_server_configuration_transports]]
===== Configuring Server Transports

CometD server transports are pluggable; the CometD implementation provides commonly used transports such as HTTP or WebSocket, but you can write your own.
You can configure the server transports using parameters that may have a prefix that specifies the transport the parameter refers to.

For example, the parameter `timeout` has no prefix, and hence it is valid for all transports; the parameter `callback-polling.jsonp.timeout` overrides the `timeout` parameter for the `callback-polling` transport only, while `ws.timeout` overrides it for the `websocket` transport (see `org.cometd.bayeux.Transport`
{javadocs}/org/cometd/bayeux/Transport.html[javadocs] for details).

Here is the list of configuration init parameters (to be specified in `web.xml`) that different server transports accept:

.`ServerTransport` Common Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| timeout
| 30000
| The time, in milliseconds, that a server waits for a message before replying to a `/meta/connect` with an empty reply.

| interval
| 0
| The time, in milliseconds, that the client must wait between the end of one `/meta/connect` request and the start of the next.

| maxInterval
| 10000
| The maximum period of time, in milliseconds, that the server waits for a new `/meta/connect` message from a client before that client is considered invalid and is removed.

| maxProcessing
| -1
| The maximum period of time, in milliseconds, that the server waits for the processing of a message before considering the session invalid and removing it.
  A negative value means to wait forever.

| maxLazyTimeout
| 5000
| The maximum period of time, in milliseconds, that the server waits before delivering or publishing lazy messages.

| metaConnectDeliverOnly
| false
| Whether the transport should deliver the messages only via `/meta/connect` (enables server-to-client strict message ordering – but not reliability).
  Enabling this option allows for server-to-client strict message ordering at the cost of a slightly chattier protocol (because delivery via `/meta/connect` may require waking up pending replies).

| maxQueue
| -1
| The maximum size of the `ServerSession` queue. A value of -1 means no queue size limit.
  A positive value triggers the invocation of `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerSession.QueueMaxedListener` when the max queue size is exceeded.

| maxMessageSize
| <impl>
| The maximum size, in bytes, of an incoming transport message (the HTTP body or the WebSocket message - both may contain multiple Bayeux messages).
  The default value depends on the transport implementation.
|===

.Long Polling & Callback Polling `ServerTransport` Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| maxSessionsPerBrowser
| 1
| The max number of sessions (tabs/frames) allowed to long poll from the same browserusing the HTTP/1.1 protocol; a negative value allows unlimited sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| http2MaxSessionsPerBrowser
| -1
| The max number of sessions (tabs/frames) allows to long poll from the same browser using the HTTP/2 protocol; a negative value allows unlimited sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| multiSessionInterval
| 2000
| The period of time, in milliseconds, that specifies the client normal polling period in case the server detects more sessions (tabs/frames) connected from the same browser than allowed by the `maxSessionsPerBrowser` parameter.
  A non-positive value means that additional sessions are disconnected.

| browserCookieName
| BAYEUX_BROWSER
| The name of the cookie used to identify multiple sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| browserCookieDomain
|
| The domain of the cookie used to identify multiple sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]). By default there is no domain.

| browserCookiePath
| /
| The path of the cookie used to identify multiple sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| browserCookieSecure
| false
| Whether to add the `Secure` attribute to the cookie used to identify xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[multiple sessions], see also xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies[this section].

| browserCookieHttpOnly
| true
| Whether to add the `HttpOnly` attribute to the cookie used to identify xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[multiple sessions].

| browserCookieSameSite
|
| The value of the `SameSite` attribute of the cookie used to identify xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[multiple sessions], see also xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies[this section].
  Meaningful values are `Strict`, `Lax` and `None`.
|===

.WebSocket `ServerTransport` Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| ws.cometdURLMapping
|
| *Mandatory*. A comma separated list of `url-pattern` strings defined by the `servlet-mapping` of the CometD Servlet.

| ws.messagesPerFrame
| 1
| How many Bayeux messages should be sent per WebSocket frame.
  Setting this parameter too high may result in WebSocket frames that may be rejected by the recipient because they are too big.

| ws.bufferSize
| <impl>
| The size, in bytes, of the buffer used to read and write WebSocket frames.
  The default value depends on the implementation. For the Jetty WebSocket implementation, this value is 4096.

| ws.idleTimeout
| <impl>
| The idle timeout, in milliseconds, for the WebSocket connection.
  The default value depends on the implementation. For the Jetty WebSocket implementation this value is 300000.

| ws.requireHandshakePerConnection
| false
| Whether every new WebSocket connection requires a handshake, see xref:_security[the security section].

| ws.enableExtension.<extension_name>
| true
| Whether the WebSocket extension with the given `extension_name` (for example `ws.enableExtension.permessage-deflate`) should be enabled if client and server could negotiate it.
  If either the client or the server does not support the extension, then the extension cannot be negotiated and this option has no effect.
  Otherwise, both client and server support the extension, which is negotiated only if this option evaluates to true (i.e. either this option is absent or explicitly set to `true`); if this option evaluates to `false`, the extension is not negotiated.
|===

[[_java_server_configuration_advanced]]
===== Advanced Configuration for the Java Server

The simplest way to setup a CometD server is to deploy your CometD application under context path `/`, and the CometD Servlet mapped to e.g. `/cometd/*`.
In this way resources such as HTML, CSS and - more importantly - JavaScript files (in particular `cometd.js`) will belong to the same domain.
This minimizes the server configuration to make browser work easily with CometD.

A more complex setup is to have your main application deployed to domain `app.domain.com` and the CometD server to `cometd.domain.com`.
The JavaScript file `cometd.js` will be served from domain `app.domain.com`, while CometD messages will be sent to and received from domain `cometd.domain.com`.

This is a cross-domain deployment and requires configuring the `CrossOriginFilter` (see xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cross_origin_filter[this section]) to allow the JavaScript file downloaded from `app.domain.com` to be able to communicate with the `cometd.domain.com` server.

Furthermore, a cross-domain deployment may require a more advanced configuration of the HTTP cookies that the CometD server sends to clients, see xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies[this section].

[[_java_server_configuration_advanced_cross_origin_filter]]
====== Configuring the `CrossOriginFilter`

Independently of the Servlet Container you are using, Jetty provides a standard, portable, `org.eclipse.jetty.servlets.CrossOriginFilter`.
This filter implements the https://www.w3.org/TR/access-control/[Cross-Origin Resource Sharing] specification, and allows recent browsers that implement it to perform cross-domain JavaScript requests (see also xref:_javascript_transports[the JavaScript transports section]).

Here is an example of `web.xml` configuration for the `CrossOriginFilter`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
    <init-param>
      <param-name>timeout</param-name>
      <param-value>60000</param-value>
    </init-param>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported>
  </servlet>
  <servlet-mapping>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </servlet-mapping>

  <filter>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.eclipse.jetty.servlets.CrossOriginFilter</filter-class>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported>
  </filter>
  <filter-mapping>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </filter-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

Refer to the https://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/cross-origin-filter.html[Jetty Cross Origin Filter documentation] for the filter configuration.

[[_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies]]
====== Configuring Cookies

Modern browsers may require that cookies sent by a server have the `SameSite` attribute.
https://web.dev/samesite-cookies-explained/[This article] is a good resource that explains how the `SameSite` attribute works.

In particular, in the case of cross-domain deployment, the CometD server should be configured to send cookies that have both the `Secure` attribute and the `SameSite=None` attribute.
In turn, the `Secure` attribute requires that the CometD server is deployed over `https` (otherwise the browser won't send the cookie, causing the CometD communication to break).

Refer to the CometD xref:_java_server_configuration_transports[server configuration section] for the cookie configuration in the CometD server.

[[_java_server_configuration_servlet_30]]
===== Configuring Servlet 3.0 or later Asynchronous Features

The CometD libraries are portable across Servlet Containers because they use the standard Servlet 3 APIs.

To enable the Servlet 3 asynchronous features, you need to:

* Make sure that in `web.xml` the `version` attribute of the `web-app` element is 3.0 or greater <1>.
* Add the `async-supported` element to filters that might execute before the `CometDServlet` _and_ to the `CometDServlet` itself <2>.

[NOTE]
====
Remember to always specify the `load-on-startup` element for the CometD Servlet.
====

For example:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1"> <1>

  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported> <2>
  </servlet>
  <servlet-mapping>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </servlet-mapping>

  <filter>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.eclipse.jetty.servlets.CrossOriginFilter</filter-class>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported> <2>
  </filter>
  <filter-mapping>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </filter-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

The typical error that you get if you do not enable the Servlet 3 asynchronous features is the following:

----
IllegalStateException: the servlet does not support async operations for this request
----

[NOTE]
====
While Jetty is configured by default with a non-blocking connector that allows CometD to run out of the box, Tomcat is not, by default, configured with a non-blocking connector.
You must first enable the non-blocking connector in Tomcat in order for CometD to work properly.
Please refer to the https://tomcat.apache.org[Tomcat documentation] for how to configure a non-blocking connector in Tomcat.
====

[[_java_server_configuration_channels]]
===== Configuring `ServerChannel`

Server channels are used to broadcast messages to multiple clients, and are a central concept of CometD (see also xref:_concepts[the concepts section]).
Class `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerChannel` represents server channels; instances of server channels can be obtained from a `BayeuxServer` instance.

With the default security policy, server channels may be created simply by publishing to a channel: if the channel does not exist, it is created on-the-fly.
This may open up for creation of a large number of server channel, for example when messages are published to channels created with a random name, such as `/topic/atyd9834o329`, and for race conditions during channel creation (since the same server channel may be created concurrently by two remote clients publishing to that channel at the same time).

To avoid that these transient server channels grow indefinitely and occupy a lot of memory, the CometD server aggressively sweeps server channels removing all channels that are not in use by the application anymore.
The sweep period can be controlled by the `sweepPeriod` parameter, see xref:_java_server_configuration_bayeux[this section].

Given the above, you need to solve two problems:

* how to atomically create and configure a server channel
* how to avoid that channels that the application knows they will be used at a later time are swept prematurely

The solution offered by the CometD API for the first problem is to provide a method that atomically creates and initializes server channels:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=init]
----
====

Method `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent(String channelName, Initializer... initializers)` atomically creates the channel, and returns a `MarkedReference` that contains the `ServerChannel` reference and a boolean that indicates whether the channel was created or if it existed already.
The `Initializer` callback is called only if the channel is created by the invocation to `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent()`.

The solution to the second problem is to configure the channel as _persistent_, so that the sweeper does not remove the channel:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=persist]
----
====

Not only you can configure `ServerChannel` instances to be persistent, but to be _lazy_ (see also xref:_java_server_lazy_messages[this section]), you can add
listeners, and you can add `Authorizer` (see also xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section]).

Creating a server channel returns a `MarkedReference` that contains the `ServerChannel` reference and a boolean that indicates whether the channel was created or if it existed already:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=reference]
----
====

The code above creates the channel, configures it to be persistent and then obtains a reference to it, that is guaranteed to be non-null.

A typical error in CometD applications is to create the channel without making it persistent, and then trying to obtain a reference to it without checking if it's null:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=wrong]
----
====

Between the `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent()` call and the
`BayeuxServer.getChannel()` call there is application code that may take a while to complete (therefore allowing the sweeper to sweep the just created server channel), so it is always safer to mark the channel as persistent, and when it is not needed anymore mark the server channel as non persistent (by calling `channel.setPersistent(false)`), to allow the sweeper to sweep it.

The server channel sweeper will sweep channels that are non-persistent, have no subscribers, have no listeners, have no authorizers and have no children channels, and only after these conditions are met for three consecutive sweeper passes.

Commit message:

Fixes #965 - Allow to configure the number of scheduler threads.
Introduced "schedulerThreads" option, and a setter for more advanced configuration.

Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_server_configuration.adoc, after:


[[_java_server_configuration]]
==== Configuring the Java Server

You can specify `BayeuxServer` parameters and server transport parameters in `web.xml` as init parameters of the `org.cometd.server.CometDServlet`.
If the CometD servlet creates the `BayeuxServer` instance, the servlet init parameters are passed to the `BayeuxServer` instance, which in turn configures the server transports.

If you followed xref:_primer[the primer], Maven has configured the `web.xml` file for you; here are details its configuration, a sample `web.xml`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
    <init-param>
      <param-name>timeout</param-name>
      <param-value>60000</param-value>
    </init-param>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported>
  </servlet>
  <servlet-mapping>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

You must define and map the `org.cometd.server.CometDServlet` in `web.xml` to enable the server to interpret the Bayeux protocol.
It is normally mapped to `+/cometd/*+`, but you can change the `url-pattern` mapping if you prefer, or even have multiple mappings.

[[_java_server_configuration_bayeux]]
==== Configuring `BayeuxServer`

Here is the list of configuration init parameters that the `BayeuxServer` implementation accepts:

.`BayeuxServer` Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| allowedTransports
| ""
| A comma-separated list of `ServerTransport` names allowed.
  If not specified, the default server transports are allowed.

| broadcastToPublisher
| true
| When a publisher is also subscribed to the channel it publishes a message to, this parameter controls whether `BayeuxServer` should broadcast the message to all subscribers (including the publisher), or only to the other subscribers.
  This property can be overridden at the channel level and at the session level.

| jsonContext
| `org.cometd.server.JettyJSONContextServer`
| The full qualified name of a class implementing `org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer`.
  The class is loaded and instantiated using the default constructor.

| transports
| ""
| A comma-separated list of `ServerTransport` implementation class names (that take a `org.cometd.server.BayeuxServerImpl` as only constructor parameter) that define the server transports.

| validateMessageFields
| true
| Whether message fields such as `channel`, `id` and `subscription` should be validated to contain legal characters as defined in xref:_bayeux_protocol_elements[the Bayeux specification].

| sweepPeriod
| 997
| The period, in milliseconds, of the sweeping activity performed by the server.

| schedulerThreads
| 1
| The number of scheduler threads that execute scheduled tasks
|===

[[_java_server_configuration_transports]]
===== Configuring Server Transports

CometD server transports are pluggable; the CometD implementation provides commonly used transports such as HTTP or WebSocket, but you can write your own.
You can configure the server transports using parameters that may have a prefix that specifies the transport the parameter refers to.

For example, the parameter `timeout` has no prefix, and hence it is valid for all transports; the parameter `callback-polling.jsonp.timeout` overrides the `timeout` parameter for the `callback-polling` transport only, while `ws.timeout` overrides it for the `websocket` transport (see `org.cometd.bayeux.Transport`
{javadocs}/org/cometd/bayeux/Transport.html[javadocs] for details).

Here is the list of configuration init parameters (to be specified in `web.xml`) that different server transports accept:

.`ServerTransport` Common Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| timeout
| 30000
| The time, in milliseconds, that a server waits for a message before replying to a `/meta/connect` with an empty reply.

| interval
| 0
| The time, in milliseconds, that the client must wait between the end of one `/meta/connect` request and the start of the next.

| maxInterval
| 10000
| The maximum period of time, in milliseconds, that the server waits for a new `/meta/connect` message from a client before that client is considered invalid and is removed.

| maxProcessing
| -1
| The maximum period of time, in milliseconds, that the server waits for the processing of a message before considering the session invalid and removing it.
  A negative value means to wait forever.

| maxLazyTimeout
| 5000
| The maximum period of time, in milliseconds, that the server waits before delivering or publishing lazy messages.

| metaConnectDeliverOnly
| false
| Whether the transport should deliver the messages only via `/meta/connect` (enables server-to-client strict message ordering – but not reliability).
  Enabling this option allows for server-to-client strict message ordering at the cost of a slightly chattier protocol (because delivery via `/meta/connect` may require waking up pending replies).

| maxQueue
| -1
| The maximum size of the `ServerSession` queue. A value of -1 means no queue size limit.
  A positive value triggers the invocation of `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerSession.QueueMaxedListener` when the max queue size is exceeded.

| maxMessageSize
| <impl>
| The maximum size, in bytes, of an incoming transport message (the HTTP body or the WebSocket message - both may contain multiple Bayeux messages).
  The default value depends on the transport implementation.
|===

.Long Polling & Callback Polling `ServerTransport` Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| maxSessionsPerBrowser
| 1
| The max number of sessions (tabs/frames) allowed to long poll from the same browserusing the HTTP/1.1 protocol; a negative value allows unlimited sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| http2MaxSessionsPerBrowser
| -1
| The max number of sessions (tabs/frames) allows to long poll from the same browser using the HTTP/2 protocol; a negative value allows unlimited sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| multiSessionInterval
| 2000
| The period of time, in milliseconds, that specifies the client normal polling period in case the server detects more sessions (tabs/frames) connected from the same browser than allowed by the `maxSessionsPerBrowser` parameter.
  A non-positive value means that additional sessions are disconnected.

| browserCookieName
| BAYEUX_BROWSER
| The name of the cookie used to identify multiple sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| browserCookieDomain
|
| The domain of the cookie used to identify multiple sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]). By default there is no domain.

| browserCookiePath
| /
| The path of the cookie used to identify multiple sessions (see also xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[this section]).

| browserCookieSecure
| false
| Whether to add the `Secure` attribute to the cookie used to identify xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[multiple sessions], see also xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies[this section].

| browserCookieHttpOnly
| true
| Whether to add the `HttpOnly` attribute to the cookie used to identify xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[multiple sessions].

| browserCookieSameSite
|
| The value of the `SameSite` attribute of the cookie used to identify xref:_java_server_multiple_sessions[multiple sessions], see also xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies[this section].
  Meaningful values are `Strict`, `Lax` and `None`.
|===

.WebSocket `ServerTransport` Configuration Parameters
[cols="^2,^3,<10"]
|===
| Parameter Name
| Default Value
| Parameter Description

| ws.cometdURLMapping
|
| *Mandatory*. A comma separated list of `url-pattern` strings defined by the `servlet-mapping` of the CometD Servlet.

| ws.messagesPerFrame
| 1
| How many Bayeux messages should be sent per WebSocket frame.
  Setting this parameter too high may result in WebSocket frames that may be rejected by the recipient because they are too big.

| ws.bufferSize
| <impl>
| The size, in bytes, of the buffer used to read and write WebSocket frames.
  The default value depends on the implementation. For the Jetty WebSocket implementation, this value is 4096.

| ws.idleTimeout
| <impl>
| The idle timeout, in milliseconds, for the WebSocket connection.
  The default value depends on the implementation. For the Jetty WebSocket implementation this value is 300000.

| ws.requireHandshakePerConnection
| false
| Whether every new WebSocket connection requires a handshake, see xref:_security[the security section].

| ws.enableExtension.<extension_name>
| true
| Whether the WebSocket extension with the given `extension_name` (for example `ws.enableExtension.permessage-deflate`) should be enabled if client and server could negotiate it.
  If either the client or the server does not support the extension, then the extension cannot be negotiated and this option has no effect.
  Otherwise, both client and server support the extension, which is negotiated only if this option evaluates to true (i.e. either this option is absent or explicitly set to `true`); if this option evaluates to `false`, the extension is not negotiated.
|===

[[_java_server_configuration_advanced]]
===== Advanced Configuration for the Java Server

The simplest way to setup a CometD server is to deploy your CometD application under context path `/`, and the CometD Servlet mapped to e.g. `/cometd/*`.
In this way resources such as HTML, CSS and - more importantly - JavaScript files (in particular `cometd.js`) will belong to the same domain.
This minimizes the server configuration to make browser work easily with CometD.

A more complex setup is to have your main application deployed to domain `app.domain.com` and the CometD server to `cometd.domain.com`.
The JavaScript file `cometd.js` will be served from domain `app.domain.com`, while CometD messages will be sent to and received from domain `cometd.domain.com`.

This is a cross-domain deployment and requires configuring the `CrossOriginFilter` (see xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cross_origin_filter[this section]) to allow the JavaScript file downloaded from `app.domain.com` to be able to communicate with the `cometd.domain.com` server.

Furthermore, a cross-domain deployment may require a more advanced configuration of the HTTP cookies that the CometD server sends to clients, see xref:_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies[this section].

[[_java_server_configuration_advanced_cross_origin_filter]]
====== Configuring the `CrossOriginFilter`

Independently of the Servlet Container you are using, Jetty provides a standard, portable, `org.eclipse.jetty.servlets.CrossOriginFilter`.
This filter implements the https://www.w3.org/TR/access-control/[Cross-Origin Resource Sharing] specification, and allows recent browsers that implement it to perform cross-domain JavaScript requests (see also xref:_javascript_transports[the JavaScript transports section]).

Here is an example of `web.xml` configuration for the `CrossOriginFilter`:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
    <init-param>
      <param-name>timeout</param-name>
      <param-value>60000</param-value>
    </init-param>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported>
  </servlet>
  <servlet-mapping>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </servlet-mapping>

  <filter>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.eclipse.jetty.servlets.CrossOriginFilter</filter-class>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported>
  </filter>
  <filter-mapping>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </filter-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

Refer to the https://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/cross-origin-filter.html[Jetty Cross Origin Filter documentation] for the filter configuration.

[[_java_server_configuration_advanced_cookies]]
====== Configuring Cookies

Modern browsers may require that cookies sent by a server have the `SameSite` attribute.
https://web.dev/samesite-cookies-explained/[This article] is a good resource that explains how the `SameSite` attribute works.

In particular, in the case of cross-domain deployment, the CometD server should be configured to send cookies that have both the `Secure` attribute and the `SameSite=None` attribute.
In turn, the `Secure` attribute requires that the CometD server is deployed over `https` (otherwise the browser won't send the cookie, causing the CometD communication to break).

Refer to the CometD xref:_java_server_configuration_transports[server configuration section] for the cookie configuration in the CometD server.

[[_java_server_configuration_servlet_30]]
===== Configuring Servlet 3.0 or later Asynchronous Features

The CometD libraries are portable across Servlet Containers because they use the standard Servlet 3 APIs.

To enable the Servlet 3 asynchronous features, you need to:

* Make sure that in `web.xml` the `version` attribute of the `web-app` element is 3.0 or greater <1>.
* Add the `async-supported` element to filters that might execute before the `CometDServlet` _and_ to the `CometDServlet` itself <2>.

[NOTE]
====
Remember to always specify the `load-on-startup` element for the CometD Servlet.
====

For example:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1"> <1>

  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported> <2>
  </servlet>
  <servlet-mapping>
    <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </servlet-mapping>

  <filter>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.eclipse.jetty.servlets.CrossOriginFilter</filter-class>
    <async-supported>true</async-supported> <2>
  </filter>
  <filter-mapping>
    <filter-name>cross-origin</filter-name>
    <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
  </filter-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

The typical error that you get if you do not enable the Servlet 3 asynchronous features is the following:

----
IllegalStateException: the servlet does not support async operations for this request
----

[NOTE]
====
While Jetty is configured by default with a non-blocking connector that allows CometD to run out of the box, Tomcat is not, by default, configured with a non-blocking connector.
You must first enable the non-blocking connector in Tomcat in order for CometD to work properly.
Please refer to the https://tomcat.apache.org[Tomcat documentation] for how to configure a non-blocking connector in Tomcat.
====

[[_java_server_configuration_channels]]
===== Configuring `ServerChannel`

Server channels are used to broadcast messages to multiple clients, and are a central concept of CometD (see also xref:_concepts[the concepts section]).
Class `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerChannel` represents server channels; instances of server channels can be obtained from a `BayeuxServer` instance.

With the default security policy, server channels may be created simply by publishing to a channel: if the channel does not exist, it is created on-the-fly.
This may open up for creation of a large number of server channel, for example when messages are published to channels created with a random name, such as `/topic/atyd9834o329`, and for race conditions during channel creation (since the same server channel may be created concurrently by two remote clients publishing to that channel at the same time).

To avoid that these transient server channels grow indefinitely and occupy a lot of memory, the CometD server aggressively sweeps server channels removing all channels that are not in use by the application anymore.
The sweep period can be controlled by the `sweepPeriod` parameter, see xref:_java_server_configuration_bayeux[this section].

Given the above, you need to solve two problems:

* how to atomically create and configure a server channel
* how to avoid that channels that the application knows they will be used at a later time are swept prematurely

The solution offered by the CometD API for the first problem is to provide a method that atomically creates and initializes server channels:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=init]
----
====

Method `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent(String channelName, Initializer... initializers)` atomically creates the channel, and returns a `MarkedReference` that contains the `ServerChannel` reference and a boolean that indicates whether the channel was created or if it existed already.
The `Initializer` callback is called only if the channel is created by the invocation to `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent()`.

The solution to the second problem is to configure the channel as _persistent_, so that the sweeper does not remove the channel:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=persist]
----
====

Not only you can configure `ServerChannel` instances to be persistent, but to be _lazy_ (see also xref:_java_server_lazy_messages[this section]), you can add
listeners, and you can add `Authorizer` (see also xref:_java_server_authorizers[the authorizers section]).

Creating a server channel returns a `MarkedReference` that contains the `ServerChannel` reference and a boolean that indicates whether the channel was created or if it existed already:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=reference]
----
====

The code above creates the channel, configures it to be persistent and then obtains a reference to it, that is guaranteed to be non-null.

A typical error in CometD applications is to create the channel without making it persistent, and then trying to obtain a reference to it without checking if it's null:

====
[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::{doc_code}/server/ServerConfigDocs.java[tags=wrong]
----
====

Between the `BayeuxServer.createChannelIfAbsent()` call and the
`BayeuxServer.getChannel()` call there is application code that may take a while to complete (therefore allowing the sweeper to sweep the just created server channel), so it is always safer to mark the channel as persistent, and when it is not needed anymore mark the server channel as non persistent (by calling `channel.setPersistent(false)`), to allow the sweeper to sweep it.

The server channel sweeper will sweep channels that are non-persistent, have no subscribers, have no listeners, have no authorizers and have no children channels, and only after these conditions are met for three consecutive sweeper passes.
