cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_json.adoc, before:


[[_java_json]]
=== JSON Libraries

CometD allows you to customize the JSON library that it uses to convert
incoming JSON into Bayeux messages and generate JSON from Bayeux messages.

Two implementations are available, one based on Jetty's
`org.eclipse.jetty.util.ajax.JSON` class, and the other based on the
https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson[Jackson] library.
The default implementation uses the Jetty library.
Distinctions between them include:

* The Jetty library allows you to plug in custom serializers and deserializers,
  to fine control the conversion from object to JSON and vice versa, via a custom API.
  Refer to the `org.eclipse.jetty.util.ajax.JSON`
  https://eclipse.org/jetty/javadoc/current/org/eclipse/jetty/util/ajax/JSON.html[javadocs]
  for further information.
* The Jackson library offers a rich API based on annotations to customize
  JSON generation, but less so to customize JSON parsing and obtain objects
  of custom classes.
  Refer to the https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson[Jackson] documentation
  for further details.

[[_java_json_api]]
==== JSONContext API

The CometD Java client implementation (see also <<_java_client,the client section>>)
uses the JSON library to generate JSON from and to parse JSON to
`org.cometd.bayeux.Message` instances.
The JSON library class that performs this generation/parsing on the client
must implement `org.cometd.common.JSONContext.Client`.

Similarly, on the server, a `org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer` implementation
generates JSON from and parses JSON to `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerMessage` instances.

[[_java_json_client_config]]
===== Client Configuration

On the client, the `org.cometd.common.JSONContext.Client` instance must be
passed directly into the transport configuration; if omitted, the default
Jetty JSON library is used.
For example:

====
[source,java]
----
HttpClient httpClient = ...;

Map<String, Object> transportOptions = new HashMap<String, Object>();

// Use the Jackson implementation
JSONContext.Client jsonContext = new JacksonJSONContextClient();
transportOptions.put(ClientTransport.JSON_CONTEXT, jsonContext);

ClientTransport transport = new LongPollingTransport(transportOptions, httpClient);

BayeuxClient client = new BayeuxClient(cometdURL, transport);
----
====

All client transports can share the `org.cometd.common.JSONContext.Client`
instance (since only one transport is used at any time).

The `JSONContext.Server` and `JSONContext.Client` classes also offer methods
to obtain a JSON parser (to deserialize JSON into objects) and a JSON generator
(to generate JSON from objects), so that the application does not need to
hardcode the usage of a specific implementation library.

Class `JSONContext.Parser` can be used to convert into objects any JSON that
the application needs to read for other purposes, for example from configuration
files, and of course convert into custom objects (see also
<<_java_json_customization,the JSON customization section>>):

====
[source,java]
----
public EchoInfo readFromConfigFile(BayeuxServer bayeuxServer) throws ParseException {
    try (FileReader reader = new FileReader("echo.json")) {
        JSONContext.Server jsonContext = (JSONContext.Server)bayeuxServer.getOption("jsonContext");
        EchoInfo info = jsonContext.getParser().parse(reader, EchoInfo.class);
        return info;
    }
}
----
====

Similarly, objects can be converted into JSON:

====
[source,java]
----
public EchoInfo writeToConfigFile(BayeuxServer bayeuxServer, EchoInfo info) throws IOException {
    // JDK 7's try-with-resources
    try (FileWriter writer = new FileWriter("echo.json")) {
        JSONContext.Server jsonContext = (JSONContext.Server)bayeuxServer.getOption("jsonContext");
        String json = jsonContext.getGenerator().generate(info);
        writer.write(json);
    }
}
----
====

[[_java_json_server_config]]
===== Server Configuration

On the server, you can specify the fully qualified name of a class implementing
`org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer` as init-parameter of the `CometDServlet`
(see also <<_java_server_configuration,the server configuration section>>);
if omitted, the default Jetty library is used.
For example:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <!-- other parameters -->
        <init-param>
            <param-name>jsonContext</param-name>
            <param-value>org.cometd.server.JacksonJSONContextServer</param-value>
        </init-param>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

The class specified must be instantiable using the default parameterless
constructor, and it must implement `org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer`.
You can customize it by adding serializers/deserializers as explained above.

[[_java_json_oort_config]]
===== Oort Configuration

In the Oort clustering (see also <<_java_oort,the Oort section>>), an `Oort`
instance need to have both the server and the client `JSONContext`: the server
one to deserialize messages that other Oort comets send, and the client one
to serialize messages to send to other Oort comets.

The `Oort` instance will use the `JSONContext.Server` already configured for
the server, as explained in <<_java_json_server_config,the JSON server configuration section>>.

The `Oort` instance will use of the `JSONContext.Client` specified in the
configuration (see also <<_java_oort_common_configuration,the Oort common configuration section>>).

[[_java_json_portability]]
==== Portability Considerations

It is possible to switch from one implementation of the JSON library to
another – for example from the Jetty library to the Jackson library, provided
that you write the application code carefully.

Jackson may produce instances of `java.util.List` when deserializing JSON arrays.
The Jetty library, however, produces `java.lang.Object[]` when deserializing
JSON arrays.

Similarly, Jackson may produce `java.lang.Integer` where the Jetty library
produces `java.lang.Long`.

To write portable application code, use the following code patterns:

====
[source,java]
----
Message message = ...;
Map<String, Object> data = message.getDataAsMap();

// Expecting a JSON array

// WRONG
Object[] array = (Object[])data.get("array");

// CORRECT
Object field = data.get("array");
Object[] array = field instanceof List ? ((List)field).toArray() : (Object[])field;


// Expecting a long

// WRONG
long value = (Long)data.get("value");

// CORRECT
long value = ((Number)data.get("value")).longValue();
----
====

[[_java_json_customization]]
==== Customizing Deserialization of JSON objects

Sometimes it is very useful to be able to obtain objects of application classes
instead of just `Map<String, Object>` when calling `message.getData()`.

You can easily achieve this with the Jetty JSON library.
It is enough that the client formats the JSON object adding an additional
`class` field whose value is the fully qualified class name that you want
to convert the JSON to:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.publish('/echo', {
    class: 'org.cometd.example.EchoInfo',
    id: '42',
    echo: 'cometd'
});
----
====

On the server, in the `web.xml` file, you register the `org.cometd.server.JettyJSONContextServer`
as `jsonContext` (see also <<_java_json_server_config,the JSON server configuration section>>),
and at startup you add a custom converter for the `org.cometd.example.EchoInfo`
class (see also <<_java_server_services_integration,the services integration section>>
for more details about configuring CometD at startup).

====
[source,java]
----
BayeuxServer bayeuxServer = ...;
JettyJSONContextServer jsonContext = (JettyJSONContextServer)bayeuxServer.getOption("jsonContext");
jsonContext.getJSON().addConvertor(EchoInfo.class, new EchoInfoConvertor());
----
====

Finally, these are the `EchoInfoConvertor` and `EchoInfo` classes:

====
[source,java]
----
public class EchoInfoConvertor implements JSON.Convertor {
    public void toJSON(Object obj, JSON.Output out) {
        EchoInfo echoInfo = (EchoInfo)obj;
        out.addClass(EchoInfo.class);
        out.add("id", echoInfo.getId());
        out.add("echo", echoInfo.getEcho());
    }

    public Object fromJSON(Map map) {
        String id = (String)map.get("id");
        String echo = (String)map.get("echo");
        return new EchoInfo(id, echo);
    }
}

public class EchoInfo {
    private final String id;
    private final String echo;

    public EchoInfo(String id, String echo) {
        this.id = id;
        this.echo = echo;
    }

    public String getId() {
        return id;
    }

    public String getEcho() {
        return echo;
    }
}
----
====

If, instead of using the JavaScript client, you are using the Java client,
it is possible to configure the Java client to perform the serialization/deserialization
of JSON objects in the same way (see also <<_java_json_client_config,the JSON client configuration section>>):

====
[source,java]
----
JettyJSONContextClient jsonContext = ...;
jsonContext.getJSON().addConvertor(EchoInfo.class, new EchoInfoConvertor());

// Later in the application
BayeuxClient bayeuxClient = ...;

bayeuxClient.getChannel("/echo").subscribe(new ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener() {
    public void onMessage(ClientSessionChannel channel, Message message) {
        // Receive directly EchoInfo objects
        EchoInfo data = (EchoInfo)message.getData();
    }
});

// Publish directly EchoInfo objects
bayeuxClient.getChannel("/echo").publish(new EchoInfo("42", "wohoo"));
----
====

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/java_json.adoc, after:


[[_java_json]]
=== JSON Libraries

CometD allows you to customize the JSON library that it uses to convert
incoming JSON into Bayeux messages and generate JSON from Bayeux messages.

Two implementations are available, one based on Jetty's
`org.eclipse.jetty.util.ajax.JSON` class, and the other based on the
https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson[Jackson] library.
The default implementation uses the Jetty library.
Distinctions between them include:

* The Jetty library allows you to plug in custom serializers and deserializers,
  to fine control the conversion from object to JSON and vice versa, via a custom API.
  Refer to the `org.eclipse.jetty.util.ajax.JSON`
  https://eclipse.org/jetty/javadoc/current/org/eclipse/jetty/util/ajax/JSON.html[javadocs]
  for further information.
* The Jackson library offers a rich API based on annotations to customize
  JSON generation, but less so to customize JSON parsing and obtain objects
  of custom classes.
  Refer to the https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson[Jackson] documentation
  for further details.

[[_java_json_api]]
==== JSONContext API

The CometD Java client implementation (see also xref:_java_client[the client section])
uses the JSON library to generate JSON from and to parse JSON to
`org.cometd.bayeux.Message` instances.
The JSON library class that performs this generation/parsing on the client
must implement `org.cometd.common.JSONContext.Client`.

Similarly, on the server, a `org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer` implementation
generates JSON from and parses JSON to `org.cometd.bayeux.server.ServerMessage` instances.

[[_java_json_client_config]]
===== Client Configuration

On the client, the `org.cometd.common.JSONContext.Client` instance must be
passed directly into the transport configuration; if omitted, the default
Jetty JSON library is used.
For example:

====
[source,java]
----
HttpClient httpClient = ...;

Map<String, Object> transportOptions = new HashMap<String, Object>();

// Use the Jackson implementation
JSONContext.Client jsonContext = new JacksonJSONContextClient();
transportOptions.put(ClientTransport.JSON_CONTEXT, jsonContext);

ClientTransport transport = new LongPollingTransport(transportOptions, httpClient);

BayeuxClient client = new BayeuxClient(cometdURL, transport);
----
====

All client transports can share the `org.cometd.common.JSONContext.Client`
instance (since only one transport is used at any time).

The `JSONContext.Server` and `JSONContext.Client` classes also offer methods
to obtain a JSON parser (to deserialize JSON into objects) and a JSON generator
(to generate JSON from objects), so that the application does not need to
hardcode the usage of a specific implementation library.

Class `JSONContext.Parser` can be used to convert into objects any JSON that
the application needs to read for other purposes, for example from configuration
files, and of course convert into custom objects (see also
xref:_java_json_customization[the JSON customization section]):

====
[source,java]
----
public EchoInfo readFromConfigFile(BayeuxServer bayeuxServer) throws ParseException {
    try (FileReader reader = new FileReader("echo.json")) {
        JSONContext.Server jsonContext = (JSONContext.Server)bayeuxServer.getOption("jsonContext");
        EchoInfo info = jsonContext.getParser().parse(reader, EchoInfo.class);
        return info;
    }
}
----
====

Similarly, objects can be converted into JSON:

====
[source,java]
----
public EchoInfo writeToConfigFile(BayeuxServer bayeuxServer, EchoInfo info) throws IOException {
    // JDK 7's try-with-resources
    try (FileWriter writer = new FileWriter("echo.json")) {
        JSONContext.Server jsonContext = (JSONContext.Server)bayeuxServer.getOption("jsonContext");
        String json = jsonContext.getGenerator().generate(info);
        writer.write(json);
    }
}
----
====

[[_java_json_server_config]]
===== Server Configuration

On the server, you can specify the fully qualified name of a class implementing
`org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer` as init-parameter of the `CometDServlet`
(see also xref:_java_server_configuration[the server configuration section]);
if omitted, the default Jetty library is used.
For example:

====
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<web-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_1.xsd"
         version="3.1">

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.cometd.server.CometDServlet</servlet-class>
        <!-- other parameters -->
        <init-param>
            <param-name>jsonContext</param-name>
            <param-value>org.cometd.server.JacksonJSONContextServer</param-value>
        </init-param>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
        <async-supported>true</async-supported>
    </servlet>
    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>cometd</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/cometd/*</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
----
====

The class specified must be instantiable using the default parameterless
constructor, and it must implement `org.cometd.server.JSONContextServer`.
You can customize it by adding serializers/deserializers as explained above.

[[_java_json_oort_config]]
===== Oort Configuration

In the Oort clustering (see also xref:_java_oort[the Oort section]), an `Oort`
instance need to have both the server and the client `JSONContext`: the server
one to deserialize messages that other Oort comets send, and the client one
to serialize messages to send to other Oort comets.

The `Oort` instance will use the `JSONContext.Server` already configured for
the server, as explained in xref:_java_json_server_config[the JSON server configuration section].

The `Oort` instance will use of the `JSONContext.Client` specified in the
configuration (see also xref:_java_oort_common_configuration[the Oort common configuration section]).

[[_java_json_portability]]
==== Portability Considerations

It is possible to switch from one implementation of the JSON library to
another – for example from the Jetty library to the Jackson library, provided
that you write the application code carefully.

Jackson may produce instances of `java.util.List` when deserializing JSON arrays.
The Jetty library, however, produces `java.lang.Object[]` when deserializing
JSON arrays.

Similarly, Jackson may produce `java.lang.Integer` where the Jetty library
produces `java.lang.Long`.

To write portable application code, use the following code patterns:

====
[source,java]
----
Message message = ...;
Map<String, Object> data = message.getDataAsMap();

// Expecting a JSON array

// WRONG
Object[] array = (Object[])data.get("array");

// CORRECT
Object field = data.get("array");
Object[] array = field instanceof List ? ((List)field).toArray() : (Object[])field;


// Expecting a long

// WRONG
long value = (Long)data.get("value");

// CORRECT
long value = ((Number)data.get("value")).longValue();
----
====

[[_java_json_customization]]
==== Customizing Deserialization of JSON objects

Sometimes it is very useful to be able to obtain objects of application classes
instead of just `Map<String, Object>` when calling `message.getData()`.

You can easily achieve this with the Jetty JSON library.
It is enough that the client formats the JSON object adding an additional
`class` field whose value is the fully qualified class name that you want
to convert the JSON to:

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.publish('/echo', {
    class: 'org.cometd.example.EchoInfo',
    id: '42',
    echo: 'cometd'
});
----
====

On the server, in the `web.xml` file, you register the `org.cometd.server.JettyJSONContextServer`
as `jsonContext` (see also xref:_java_json_server_config[the JSON server configuration section]),
and at startup you add a custom converter for the `org.cometd.example.EchoInfo`
class (see also xref:_java_server_services_integration[the services integration section]
for more details about configuring CometD at startup).

====
[source,java]
----
BayeuxServer bayeuxServer = ...;
JettyJSONContextServer jsonContext = (JettyJSONContextServer)bayeuxServer.getOption("jsonContext");
jsonContext.getJSON().addConvertor(EchoInfo.class, new EchoInfoConvertor());
----
====

Finally, these are the `EchoInfoConvertor` and `EchoInfo` classes:

====
[source,java]
----
public class EchoInfoConvertor implements JSON.Convertor {
    public void toJSON(Object obj, JSON.Output out) {
        EchoInfo echoInfo = (EchoInfo)obj;
        out.addClass(EchoInfo.class);
        out.add("id", echoInfo.getId());
        out.add("echo", echoInfo.getEcho());
    }

    public Object fromJSON(Map map) {
        String id = (String)map.get("id");
        String echo = (String)map.get("echo");
        return new EchoInfo(id, echo);
    }
}

public class EchoInfo {
    private final String id;
    private final String echo;

    public EchoInfo(String id, String echo) {
        this.id = id;
        this.echo = echo;
    }

    public String getId() {
        return id;
    }

    public String getEcho() {
        return echo;
    }
}
----
====

If, instead of using the JavaScript client, you are using the Java client,
it is possible to configure the Java client to perform the serialization/deserialization
of JSON objects in the same way (see also xref:_java_json_client_config[the JSON client configuration section]):

====
[source,java]
----
JettyJSONContextClient jsonContext = ...;
jsonContext.getJSON().addConvertor(EchoInfo.class, new EchoInfoConvertor());

// Later in the application
BayeuxClient bayeuxClient = ...;

bayeuxClient.getChannel("/echo").subscribe(new ClientSessionChannel.MessageListener() {
    public void onMessage(ClientSessionChannel channel, Message message) {
        // Receive directly EchoInfo objects
        EchoInfo data = (EchoInfo)message.getData();
    }
});

// Publish directly EchoInfo objects
bayeuxClient.getChannel("/echo").publish(new EchoInfo("42", "wohoo"));
----
====
