cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/preface.adoc, before:


:numbered!:

[preface]
== Preface

https://cometd.org/[CometD] is a scalable web event routing bus that allows you
to write low-latency, server-side, event-driven web applications.
Typical examples of such applications are stock trading applications, web chat
applications, online games, and monitoring consoles.

CometD provides you APIs to implement these messaging patterns: publish/subscribe,
peer-to-peer (via a server), and remote procedure call.
This is achieved using a transport-independent protocol,
<<_bayeux,the Bayeux protocol>>, that can be carried over HTTP or
over https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket[WebSocket] (or other transport
protocols), so that your application is not bound to a specific transport
technology.

CometD leverages WebSocket when it can (because it's the most
efficient web messaging protocol), and makes use of an
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AJAX[Ajax] push technology
pattern known as https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comet_(programming)[Comet]
when using HTTP.

The CometD project provides Java and JavaScript libraries that allow you to
write low-latency, server-side, event-driven web applications in a simple and
portable way.
You can therefore concentrate on the business side of your application rather
than worrying about low-level details such as the transport (HTTP or WebSocket),
the scalability and the robustness.
The CometD libraries provide these latter characteristics.

.CometD Versions
[cols="1a,1a,1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| CometD Version | Required Java Version | Jetty Version | Status
| CometD 6.0.x | Java 11 | Jetty 10.0.x | Experimental

| CometD 5.0.x | Java 8 | Jetty 9.4.x | Stable

| CometD 4.0.x | Java 8 | Jetty 9.4.x | End-Of-Life

| CometD 3.1.x | Java 7 | Jetty 9.4.x +
Jetty 9.3.x +
Jetty 9.2.x | End-Of-Life

| CometD 3.0.x | Java 7 | Jetty 9.2.x | End-Of-Life

| CometD 2.x | Java 5 | Jetty 8.1.x +
Jetty 7.6.x | End-Of-Life
|===

If you are new to CometD, you can follow this learning path: 

. Read <<_installation,the installation section>> to download, install CometD and to try out its demos.
. Read <<_primer,the primer section>> to get your hands dirty with CometD with a step-by-step tutorial.
. Read <<_concepts,the concepts section>> to understand the abstractions that CometD defines.
. Study the CometD demos that ship with the CometD distribution . 
. Read the rest of this reference book for further details.

You can contribute to the CometD project and be involved in the CometD community,
including:

* Trying it out and reporting issues at https://bugs.cometd.org
* Participating in the https://groups.google.com/group/cometd-users/[CometD Users]
and https://groups.google.com/group/cometd-dev/[CometD Development] mailing lists.
* Helping out with the documentation by contacting the mailing lists or by reporting issues.
* Spreading the word about CometD in your organization.

:numbered:

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/preface.adoc, after:


:numbered!:

[preface]
== Preface

https://cometd.org/[CometD] is a scalable web event routing bus that allows you
to write low-latency, server-side, event-driven web applications.
Typical examples of such applications are stock trading applications, web chat
applications, online games, and monitoring consoles.

CometD provides you APIs to implement these messaging patterns: publish/subscribe,
peer-to-peer (via a server), and remote procedure call.
This is achieved using a transport-independent protocol,
xref:_bayeux[the Bayeux protocol], that can be carried over HTTP or
over https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket[WebSocket] (or other transport
protocols), so that your application is not bound to a specific transport
technology.

CometD leverages WebSocket when it can (because it's the most
efficient web messaging protocol), and makes use of an
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AJAX[Ajax] push technology
pattern known as https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comet_(programming)[Comet]
when using HTTP.

The CometD project provides Java and JavaScript libraries that allow you to
write low-latency, server-side, event-driven web applications in a simple and
portable way.
You can therefore concentrate on the business side of your application rather
than worrying about low-level details such as the transport (HTTP or WebSocket),
the scalability and the robustness.
The CometD libraries provide these latter characteristics.

.CometD Versions
[cols="1a,1a,1a,1a", options="header"]
|===
| CometD Version | Required Java Version | Jetty Version | Status
| CometD 6.0.x | Java 11 | Jetty 10.0.x | Experimental

| CometD 5.0.x | Java 8 | Jetty 9.4.x | Stable

| CometD 4.0.x | Java 8 | Jetty 9.4.x | End-Of-Life

| CometD 3.1.x | Java 7 | Jetty 9.4.x +
Jetty 9.3.x +
Jetty 9.2.x | End-Of-Life

| CometD 3.0.x | Java 7 | Jetty 9.2.x | End-Of-Life

| CometD 2.x | Java 5 | Jetty 8.1.x +
Jetty 7.6.x | End-Of-Life
|===

If you are new to CometD, you can follow this learning path: 

. Read xref:_installation[the installation section] to download, install CometD and to try out its demos.
. Read xref:_primer[the primer section] to get your hands dirty with CometD with a step-by-step tutorial.
. Read xref:_concepts[the concepts section] to understand the abstractions that CometD defines.
. Study the CometD demos that ship with the CometD distribution . 
. Read the rest of this reference book for further details.

You can contribute to the CometD project and be involved in the CometD community,
including:

* Trying it out and reporting issues at https://bugs.cometd.org
* Participating in the https://groups.google.com/group/cometd-users/[CometD Users]
and https://groups.google.com/group/cometd-dev/[CometD Development] mailing lists.
* Helping out with the documentation by contacting the mailing lists or by reporting issues.
* Spreading the word about CometD in your organization.

:numbered:
