cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/troubleshooting.adoc, before:


[[_troubleshooting]]
== Troubleshooting

[[_troubleshooting_logging]]
=== Logging

The CometD libraries emit log statements at `INFO` and `DEBUG` levels.
Very little, if anything, is produced at `INFO` level: typically only unexpected
application exceptions detected by the CometD libraries, such as exceptions thrown by
<<_concept_listeners,listeners>> and <<_extensions,extensions>>.

The CometD Java libraries (both client and server) use http://slf4j.org[SLF4J]
as logging framework.
You can therefore plugin any logging implementation that supports SLF4J, and
configure the logging category `org.cometd` at `INFO` level.

When CometD does not work, the first thing that you want to do is to enable debug logging.
This is helpful because by reading the debug logs you get a better understanding
of what is going on in the system (and that alone may give you the answers you
need to fix the problem), and because CometD developers will probably need the
debug logs to help you.

[[_troubleshooting_logging_javascript]]
==== Enabling Debug Logging in the JavaScript Library

To enable debug logging on the JavaScript client library
(see also <<_javascript,the JavaScript library section>>) you must pass the `logLevel` field to the
configuration of the `cometd` object, with value `'debug'` (see also
<<_javascript_configure,the JavaScript library configuration section>> for other
configuration options):

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd',
    logLevel: 'debug'
});
----
====

The CometD JavaScript library uses the `window.console` object to output log statements.

Once you have logging enabled on the JavaScript client library, you can see the
debug logs in the browser JavaScript console.
For example, in Firefox you can open the JavaScript console by clicking on
_Tools -> Web Developer -> Web Console_, while in Chrome you can open the JavaScript
console by clicking on _Tools -> Developer Tools_.

[NOTE]
====
Internet Explorer does not define the `window.console` object as other browsers do,
resulting in CometD not being able to output logs in the JavaScript console,
depending on the Internet Explorer version.
====

[[_troubleshooting_logging_java_server]]
==== Enabling Debug Logging in the Java Server Library

The Java server library uses the SLF4J APIs, but it does not bind to any specific
logging implementation. You have to choose what implementation you want to use.
By default, SLF4J comes with with a simple binding that _does not_ log statements
produced at debug level.

Therefore you must configure SLF4J with a more advanced binding such as
https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4J2] or https://logback.qos.ch/[Logback].
Refer to the SLF4J documentation and the binding implementation documentation on
how to configure logging when using these advanced bindings.

Therefore, to enable CometD debug logging for your application you need to
configure whatever SLF4J binding you have chosen to use.

Once you have logging enabled on the Java server library, you can see the debug
logs in the terminal where you launched your Servlet Container (or in its log
files, depending on how it is configured).

Commit message:

Using the xref inline macro rather than <<>>.
Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

cometd-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/troubleshooting.adoc, after:


[[_troubleshooting]]
== Troubleshooting

[[_troubleshooting_logging]]
=== Logging

The CometD libraries emit log statements at `INFO` and `DEBUG` levels.
Very little, if anything, is produced at `INFO` level: typically only unexpected
application exceptions detected by the CometD libraries, such as exceptions thrown by
xref:_concept_listeners,listeners>> and <<_extensions[extensions].

The CometD Java libraries (both client and server) use http://slf4j.org[SLF4J]
as logging framework.
You can therefore plugin any logging implementation that supports SLF4J, and
configure the logging category `org.cometd` at `INFO` level.

When CometD does not work, the first thing that you want to do is to enable debug logging.
This is helpful because by reading the debug logs you get a better understanding
of what is going on in the system (and that alone may give you the answers you
need to fix the problem), and because CometD developers will probably need the
debug logs to help you.

[[_troubleshooting_logging_javascript]]
==== Enabling Debug Logging in the JavaScript Library

To enable debug logging on the JavaScript client library
(see also xref:_javascript[the JavaScript library section]) you must pass the `logLevel` field to the
configuration of the `cometd` object, with value `'debug'` (see also
xref:_javascript_configure[the JavaScript library configuration section] for other
configuration options):

====
[source,javascript]
----
cometd.configure({
    url: 'http://localhost:8080/cometd',
    logLevel: 'debug'
});
----
====

The CometD JavaScript library uses the `window.console` object to output log statements.

Once you have logging enabled on the JavaScript client library, you can see the
debug logs in the browser JavaScript console.
For example, in Firefox you can open the JavaScript console by clicking on
_Tools -> Web Developer -> Web Console_, while in Chrome you can open the JavaScript
console by clicking on _Tools -> Developer Tools_.

[NOTE]
====
Internet Explorer does not define the `window.console` object as other browsers do,
resulting in CometD not being able to output logs in the JavaScript console,
depending on the Internet Explorer version.
====

[[_troubleshooting_logging_java_server]]
==== Enabling Debug Logging in the Java Server Library

The Java server library uses the SLF4J APIs, but it does not bind to any specific
logging implementation. You have to choose what implementation you want to use.
By default, SLF4J comes with with a simple binding that _does not_ log statements
produced at debug level.

Therefore you must configure SLF4J with a more advanced binding such as
https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4J2] or https://logback.qos.ch/[Logback].
Refer to the SLF4J documentation and the binding implementation documentation on
how to configure logging when using these advanced bindings.

Therefore, to enable CometD debug logging for your application you need to
configure whatever SLF4J binding you have chosen to use.

Once you have logging enabled on the Java server library, you can see the debug
logs in the terminal where you launched your Servlet Container (or in its log
files, depending on how it is configured).
